Hello and welcome everyone.
Today's lesson is dedicated to protected areas and climate change.
We are going to have a quick look at the definition of climate change, the challenges for protected areas, the effects of climate change, the role of adaptation and mitigation of protected areas.
I suggest you take a look at this website to learn more.
Climate change is a sustained change related to the expected and usual climate conditions for a given region.
It occurs over decades, or maybe even longer periods.
It concerns significant statistical variations of the general state of the climate or of their variability, which persists for a prolonged period.
Today, climate change is of major interest to scientists as well as the public, due to the implications regarding food security, health, the economy on a global and national scale, as well as our lifestyles, population growth, the evolution and degradation of habitats, as for example deforestation and degradation of wetlands etc.
The main cause of climate change, according to experts on the subject, is the increase in greenhouse gas, especially carbon dioxide, due to widespread use of fossil fuels since the industrial era, and especially the last 100 years.
The unprecedented increase of global temperatures that happened in the 20th century is the greatest of the last millennium, according to IPCC.
This increase is mostly due to the impact of human activity on the climatic balance of the planet, and has induced changes in rainfall patterns, in times of drought, storms, the acidification and temperature of oceans, the sea level rise etc.
The challenges for protected areas facing climate change.
For several decades, protected areas have been considered to be an essential tool for biodiversity conservation.
The impacts of climate change now give them a renewed role as an adaptation tool to climate change.
They have a threefold function in this respect: to help species to adapt to the pattern of climate change and to sudden climate events by providing refuges and migration corridors.
Protecting populations against sudden climatic events and reducing vulnerability to flooding, to drought, and other catastrophes linked to climate.
Directly helping economies to adapt to climate change by reducing costs deriving from the harmful effects of climatic events.
From the point of view of ecological challenges, the world has now more than 200,000 protected areas.
Those consisting of land masses cover more than 15% of the surface area of the globe, and protected areas appear amongst the most effective tools in protecting species against extinction and the impact of man-made threats.
Concerning social issues, protected areas might be able to supply services specifically for the ecosystem and increase the ability of the local population to adapt to climate change.
On the impact of climate change.
Climate change modifies two factors that control the distribution of biomes, namely temperature and precipitation.
That means that the ecosystems that we find within the biomes, are directly affected by climate change.
A number of other factors of anthropogenic sources complicate the response of the vast majority of ecosystems when faced with climate change.
Conversely, changes in the function of ecosystems due to the anthropogenic component and climate change, could greatly influence the world's climate.
We note the impact on nutrient and carbon cycles.
As an example, one of the most well known impacts of the accumulation of greenhouse gas is global warming.
The impact on vegetation, for example global warming, could cause temperatures that the local vegetation is not adapted to and it would not be synchronized with the photoperiods.
Impact on fauna, for example, birds, that migrate over great distances, could see their reproduction area and wintering ground modified.
The effects of natural and anthropogenic disturbances.
As an example, the appearance and proliferation of invasive species could be accentuated by climate change in forests and in Sudanian Savanna.
Listen to Ibrahim Thiaw,
Deputy Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, on the role played by protected areas faced with climate change.
Today, in the world, there are around 200,000 protected areas .
They cover a little more than 14% of the world's land and almost 3% of oceans.
Beyond their initial function of conservation for fauna and flora, they are progressively transformed into providers of natural and cost effective solutions thus contributing to taking up certain great contemporary challenges, which are the most difficult to explain.
Humanity is still confronted with these issues.
Therefore, protected areas contribute to mitigation and adaptation to climate change.
Well conserved, protected areas form important carbon sinks.
In fact, UNEP estimates that 15% of terrestrial carbon stocks are stored in protected areas.
However, mismanaged, degraded forests contribute up to 17% of global carbon emissions, which makes it the third emission source above the transport sector.
Protected areas also form buffer zones against catastrophes, whether they are natural or anthropogenic in origin, for example flooding, forest fires, hurricanes etc.
Furthermore, they supply essential ecosystem services: food, pure air and freshwater.
As you see, protected areas deliver many benefits to humanity.
We must therefore invest in conservation or restoration of natural capital, the only thing capable of guaranteeing services, not only in the short term but also the long term, working thus as a safety valve for generations to come.
In conclusion, in module 2 on planning, you have seen the planning methods for protected areas.
So that the protected areas network is effective, the selection of sights must be the best it can be and strategies must be adapted for the establishment of protected areas in the context of global change, and climate change is one of them.
To achieve this, it is essential to define the networks of resilient protected areas manage them for resilience, climate adaptation and mitigation and integrate them into the climate planning process.
This is the end of this lesson.
In the next class we will examine another aspect related to today's subject: connectivity between protected areas.
Until then, have a great day!
