Hello, in this sequence, we will look into the notions of gender and equity in protected areas.
The reference book for this sequence is is
French:
Gender and equity in the Protected Areas of
West Africa by Julienne N. Anoko for FIBA and IUCN.
This is the reference book that I recommend you read.
What is equity?
According to a commonly accepted definition, taking into consideration the equity principle
"aims at an equitable access of men and women to develop their capacities, regardless of their sex, gender, social class, religion or age".
The issue of equity, please take note of this, tends to be associated or confused with women's demands, because it is mainly them who suffered and who continue to experience inequality.
But you will have realized that there is much more to this notion.
In the process of managing protected areas, in most cases, dialogue only takes into account the men's perspective.
It therefore excludes the other groups, women whose roles as users, managers, environmental experts, but also as destroyers of natural resources are clearly evident.
It also excludes young and old people, and other sectors of the population.
And yet, the approach for sustainable development recommends recognizing and taking into account all of a nation's strengths in order to attain their objectives.
It subsequently becomes essential that all development projects include the principle of equity in each of their phases.
Let's have a look together at some extracts from the video on equity, a video developed and prepared by the IUCN
PAPACO Programme.
Equity...
I see equity much more as a justice principle, insofar as... the two genders have just as much the same ability to intervene in the development process, and that the female gender is frequently made invisible despite all the efforts they make.
It would simply be establishing justice.
We need to start from the woman's place in society, which is good, and try to move forward so that there is this equity, because we know so well that they participate in the management of areas.
She is the one who lives it daily, and it's through the day-to-day that we can change, I believe.
Throughout the centuries, it is the women, who have suffered the most from discrimination.
Today, we feel obliged to try and first of all balance things out, to at least level things out for there to be a certain, and a faint balancing out, at least before incorporating all of the other social classes.
These girls come from local villages in the hunting zone in Ghana, and as their zone's benefits are reduced, their zone's natural resources, we can only pay them back by supporting them with their children's studies.
It is true that other activities are carried out in this field, there is maybe gardening that may have been mentioned to you, there is also some drilling that has been done in some villages.
So that's what we do with the idea that we can still give back to these local zones.
Educating these young girls, it's also educating a family.
We therefore think that if, in these villages, there are girls who manage to succeed, they will be more sensitive, they will come back to support their parents and these are immediate impacts and its the whole village, who will benefit from it.
One day, these women will come back to work on their village's development for decision-making, for the other activities.
We have been thinking that, for now, it is better to support these young girls, who have not only been abandoned, because the parents prefer to give them away in marriage, but we think that, now, as soon as they succeed, they will come back to support their village.
With equity, we also think that we must aim to eliminate all of the barriers that are an obstacle to people possessing their economic, social and political rights.
Equity is also justice.
This means eliminating all sorts of barriers that mean that people cannot benefit from what is rightly theirs.
Pendjari Park covers nearly 300,000 hectares.
It was created in 1961.
It belongs to the savanna that extends over several million acres between Benin, Burkina Faso and Niger.
They are mainly composed of W Park and Arli
Park.
In the south, it is bordered by the Atakora
Mountains.
The Pendjari river is the only significant waterway and it runs for around 125 miles within the park.
Pendjari park was declared Biosphere Reserve in 1986.
It has been split into several zones with one for hunting, where there are dozens of wildlife species, including elephants, lions, buffaloes and antilopes.
In the 1980s, Pendjari Park's natural resources gradually deteriorated.
Local people were therefore kept away from the park and poaching was rife throughout the area.
Having observed this, management decided to involve the local populations in the management of the reserve.
Equity has added to the management of natural resources, particularly in West Africa, firstly by showing us that women and vulnerable groups are knowledgeable, and equity has enabled the knowledge that these people have to be valued.
Equity has also enabled these advantages to be spread out and equity has enabled many of these people to come forward, to have a voice so that they can express themselves, as we've been able to listen to groups that we were not listening to, thanks to equity in conservation in West Africa.
The Urok community area has the essential characteristic of cultural inclusion.
Management rules are decided by updating traditional management rules.
In traditional management, women play a role in every stage of exploiting strategic resources, like, for example, shells for food security.
And we cannot be effective when managing these resources if we do not involve women.
And so, more than just a question of finding equity, it is also about finding effectiveness.
Along with other women, young and old,
Iana is off to collect shells on the shores at low tide.
These shells are one of the staple foods in the Bijagos, especially just before the harvest, when the lofts are empty.
It is also a traditional ritual that is transmitted from one generation to another and tradition is always closely linked to the environment.
We cook the shells with rice, if we have rice, otherwise we can cook them with mangoes.
We can also use mangrove fruit, it is very very nourishing.
It is a traditional dish.
Our grandmothers and mothers taught us how to prepare shells.
It is also very important during rituals and ceremonies.
Bijago people are organized by age groups and to transition from one age group into another, a ritual and ceremonies are needed.
For these events, we prepare the traditional dishes.
I am a member of Urok's management commitee.
I have every right to speak in this meeting, to express myself.
In West Africa, we have started to act, we put it in place, the people accepted it, but we still have many obstacles, which mean that people aren't taking the plunge.
People don't have the courage to say "yes, we will accept change."
And I think we should not be afraid, because it's a desire and until we decide to change things ourselves, to work on it, I don't think we will manage it.
But there are still many constraints.
We must also understand that things were built over many centuries and what we would like is for people to be made aware, to accept that we can change, and that the changes are not just negative.
There, this sequence is now finished.
You now understand the whole point of integrating and taking into account the principle of equity in managing protected areas.
For the manager, it is about prioritizing dialogue between all social classes.
It is about integrating equity in developing and preparing the management plan.
It is about having all the groups participate in the activities, in the protected area's actions.
Finally, it is about ensuring an equitable distribution of access to development, to activities, and to the benefits that protected areas can bring.
There, this sequence is finished.
I invite you to refer to the guide and the video.
Have a good day.
