We are now at the end of this MOOC on the management and governance of protected areas in Africa.
I hope you enjoyed following it as much as we enjoyed developing it.
And of course, I hope it helped you better understand these territories, their interests, their specificities, their issues, and that it will help you to protect them better in the future.
They deserve it, and they need our help.
I would like to thank one more time the three key people who coordinated this
MOOC with me :
Sylvie Goyet,
Paul NDiaye, and Paul Ouedraogo, you know them well by now.
And thank as well wholeheartedly the many speakers that participated over the weeks.
Particularly my colleagues from Papaco of whom so many joined us.
Arsène Sanon,
Bora Masumbuko,
Youssouph Diedhiou, et Lacina Koné.
I have a special thought for Beatrice Chataigner and her partner Nestor of course, for having greatly contributed to the preparation of this MOOC.
Also, Marion Langrand who managed the forum, and the discussions with an expert hand.
And Marc Chataigner who created the illustrations of our conclusions.
Without forgetting all the personnel of the
EPFL, who enthusiastically helped us to prepare these videos.
Especially Cibèle Avelino, who, as you have seen, edited the videos perfectly.
All of the very dedicated team at the Centre for Digital Education of the
EPFL.
And of course, all of our friends of the MOOC programme for Africa, without whom this training would not have seen the light of day.
Of course, we count on you for your comments, your opinions, your criticisms or encouragements to know what you enjoyed, what was useful, what can be improved.
We would also like to know which topic you would like to see be developed in greater detail.
And we will see if this can soon be a part of a new MOOC to be created, why not?
Feel free to contact us.
We hope to continue working together through the website papaco.org, on our social media platforms, on the field, in your activities.
Don't forget to register for the NAPA letter, if you wish to stay in touch month after month.
And if possible, to join the world commission of protected areas, with which you are now very familiar.
Finally, I just need to thank the organisations and the people who have financed this MOOC,
Mr. André Hoffmann, thank you sir, the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and the Franco-Swiss partnership, especially the French agency for development.
A reminder that this MOOC is the fruit of a technical collaboration between the EPFL, IUCN, the university of
Cheikh Anta Diop and the Ramsar convention represented by its
Secretariat
See you soon, I hope.
Have a great day.
