Hello.
In this video, we are going to talk about two things.
First, the basic vocabulary.
What is a plot?
What is an islet?
What is a housing development?
And so on.
The second thing we are going to talk about, is the big principles that generate the drawing of the housing development, and that allow most of the time to make profitable the housing development's networks.
So we are going to talk, point by point, about what is a plot, what is an islet, and what is a housing development.
So the base unit of the housing development is the plot.
In this context, a plot is a legal or physical delimitation of a land.
This delimitation includes the notion of property or appropriation for use.
Or both of them.
The collectivity governs the delimitation and/or the use.
So the definition of the plot can change depending on the time and the place.
A set of plots is an islet.
And a set of islets is a piecemeal.
Therefore, the housing development is an operation in order to create a piecemeal.
The housing development can therefore be defined as an operation of housing development and the result of that same operation.
On the other hand, we have the reparcelling which is the contrary of a housing development, as it is about gathering several plots in one.
So for instance, to resume our definition of the housing development, the housing development is an volunteer operation, as we can see on the picture, of creation of a piecemeal fabric.
So we see three types, one here, a second one there and a third type of piecemeal on the bottom of the picture.
It consists of dividing a land into several plots, doomed to construction in theory.
By extension, the piecemeal and the housing development totally confuse themselves.
The picture is interesting here, because it shows us diverse types of standing.
I resume my three types of housing development with a pretty high standing, a medium one here and the lowest standing, that only consists in making a certain amount of plots viable, in putting electricity poles and then in clearing the land and that's it.
The first principle, for the housing development, is the principle of reinforcement.
The idea behing that, is to not think about the different elements in an autonomous way, but to articulate them with each other.
For example, if I have a bus station here, an other taxi station, we would rather try to put the elements together, so that, at the end, my taxi station and my bus station, and also my pedestrian movement, for example, could be together and react together and articulate one another.
This is really the principle of reinforcement.
We use the elements to reinforce all of them.
The second principle is the principle of continuity.
Continuity of the movements, continuity of the built space, continuity of green spaces.
We try to create like this, corridors with trees for the fauna and the flora, espacially the small fauna, or for movements, to avoid movements to be cut up and to allow them to floz in the city in a fluid way.
This is the principle of continuity.
The third principle is the basic principle.
The principle of outsourcing.
What does that mean?
It means that we do not have to find equipments specifically in the housing development, we can imagine a certain amount of big equipments.
Like a big hospital, that can be outside the housing development.
So, the housing development doesn't need, for its equipments, to be totally autonomous, but we can go look for a certain amount of services outside the housing development.
Earlier we had the principle of continuity as a basic principle, we are now going to recommend the exact opposite, as it is about the principle of discontinuity, actually, it is about, in the fluidity, in the continuity, creating a certain amount of exceptions, to avoid too much monotony in the city and in the housing developments.
The fifth and last basic principle for the housing development, is the principle of concentration.
We will actually try to concentrate the equipments, those that require an important accessibility, on the crossroads more than in places hard to access.
So we will use the crossroads that have a lot of people to specifically concentrate a certain amount of things.
This is the principle of concentration.
An other example of the principle of concentration.
It is the concentration of a population all around an equipment.
The more people we are in a 300 meter perimeter of walking all around my equipment, or a 500 meter,depending on the equipments, it doesn't matter, the more people you have in this perimeter, the more profitable it will be to have an equipment in the center.
On the other hand, if I enlarge my plots,
I will for sure, in the same perimeter of
300 or 500 meters, I will have less people who will be able to use my equipment.
It is also a way to show the principle of concentration.
Here we are, we went through the five basic principles.
As a reminder: reinforcement, continuity, outsourcing, discontinuity and concentration,
In the next videos we are going to talk about how we can implement those big principles.
