In this very short video, we will see an important aspect of housing development.
It's the balance between real estate and land in free-market economies.
As we said, there is a balance between the cost of land and real estate investment.
What is the cost of land?
It's first and foremost the price of the plot.
Plus the land development, land clearing, making a plan, network costs, and finally equipment costs if they are assigned to the cost of land, which is not always the case, sometimes, the equipment is not included.
Next come real estate investments.
What are they?
They are any buildings on the land.
If we take the geometry of the plot, or of the right to use, it gives the building volume, which determines the possible real estate investments.
If I start from the cost of land,
I get an economical interest in building.
We can play with the different factors, for example, a high cost of land will spur to create density in order to report the high cost on as many houses as possible.
On the other hand, if we want to decrease the cost of land we can, for example, lower the network cost, therefore the service provided with the networks, or modify the geometry of the plots.
If the building volumes are too small, we will try to increase them, it's a well-know speculation: plots are being bought with low building rights, then we put pressure on the government to try and increase the rights in order to have the best profitability.
These examples happen obviously in a free market economy where land and real estate balance each other out.
In a non-market economy system, the role of the government is utterly important as it may fluctuate the land prices.
Although, it cannot change the cost of the infrastructures, it may still be able to vary the cost of land.
So the government in some countries that have a lot of plots may flood the market in order to lower land prices in the free market economy or put pressure on this market to increase land prices.
So the government leeway on the cost of land is utterly important.
This is roughly the balance issues between land and real estate.
