Here in this last video of this week, we will talk about some examples that are going to take us to Luanda, Dakar 
Dakar or Kigali and we will see that in these cities, depending on the standard or the standing of the chosen subdivision, there are large, indeed, very, very large disparities between the surface areas of the subdivisions.
First example, the city of Luanda.
A neighborhood chosen at random, we see that the subdivision is very regular, we see, the double block, let's show it differently, so each time, we come to determine a plot, and we realize that the plots are more or less 13 meters by 14, so we have seen it, it's not the best, we are almost dealing with a square, it's not the best of the solutions, but we have plots which are relatively small, we will see those ones later, that are 182 square meters.
Road allowances, primaries at 18 meters, 
11 meters for the secondary and the tertiary at eight meters.
Another example in Luanda, we see that we change the standing, here we have
696 meters once again between 24 and 29, we almost have a square.
What is interesting to see here is that the roads are however much smaller than in the other subdivision.
It's normal with plots of 696 square meters, we really have far less residents so a very different road need.
Another example, Kigali, we recognize the city easily by its hills, let's take a first neighborhood.
We see the blocks here, which are subdivided in plots, it's easier to see, here we have three plots, so the first neighborhood we have very small plots, 9 by 12, 108 and then primary roads at 12 meters and secondaries at 10 meters.
We have a very very high density.
We change aspect, we change neighborhood, we have a neighborhood which starts on the hillside, we see it by its curves which follow more or less the natural curves and there we find ourselves with surface areas of 425 square meters, so they are enormous plots, even though we are dealing with equivalent routes for primary and secondary and a tertiary which is practically for the pedestrian.
Another example, still in Kigali, we see here that the size of the plots, it's very easily detectable and here we are looking at surface areas of 600 square meters which are surface areas that one must admit, are huge compared to the needs of a family.
Now to Dakar.
We travel very quickly, we were in Luanda, we go on to Kigali, we arrive in Dakar, with a first neighborhood, here also easy to see the different blocks, we can then subdivide them and we have 12 by 16, 192 square meters of plot once again 12, 7 and 5 meters.
All this to give you a palette of what is possible and what exists, we see now North Pikine, so we see density but it's because we're not using the same scale, the primary is very big and the secondary and tertiary are very small and the plots on the other hand, which are plots of 300 square meters.
Finally Keur Massar, on the outskirts of Dakar, really, previously outskirts since the city is catching up rapidly, we also have a certain number of plots of 300 square meters.
There you have, some examples, very quickly examined, we have seen we are at 700 square meters in a subdivision, while in others we are at 108 or sometimes a plot of 100 square meters.
A summary neighborhood, we added
Bangui et Bamako, we see that we are at 108, without a doubt, at the smallest, searching, to the biggest, which is 748 square meters, so we have differences which are huge depending on, not only the standing that we want to create in the neighborhood, but also the construction practices.
The 192, which is a module of 12 by 16 in Dakar, is without a doubt the one which we find the most in the whole city, we find it in a second neighborhood, while the 300 square meter plots in Dakar are relatively rare.
On the other hand, we see that we are much more large, much bigger in Luanda, and we are not talking about
Bamako where the three neighborhoods chosen at random show the huge plots relative to the needs of a family.
There it is, there is no value judgment behind these different subdivisions, but simply to show that the contrasts are enormous and that if we are dealing with a subdivision of 108 or 192 square meters and a subdivision of 748, inevitably the profitability of the pot will not be the same.
There you have it, that's how our video ends.
