Welcome to our video dedicated to public spaces.
We are going to take a look at space issues.
We are going to see how to define them.
We are going to see the difference between a public space and public spaces.
And then we will show examples.
The first is the construction of a public space in the N'Djamena city center.
The second, is a method of capturing public space.
A photographic method that allows to see modifications, changes throughout the day, that occur before our eyes, in the public space.
How to define public space? 
Several solutions.
We can define it by its issues, we will see what the issues are later.
We can define it by its atmosphere.
We can define it by its players.
But we can also define it by its context, its form or rather by its connection between what is public and what is private.
The big themes of public space, the issues, the themes that then become issues.
The first, without a doubt, the most important maybe, is the question of infrastructures.
Then, there is the question of public or private transportation plus mobility.
The environmental question is fundamental.
Occupation versus management of the space.
The question of built space.
There are a certain number of public spaces that are built spaces, I'm thinking specifically of markets.
The street, is also a resource. 
People live off the street and by the street. 
But public space can be a space of protest, a space where a certain number of civil or civic activities occur.
Then, public space is a violent space, be it real or assumed.
And finally, it's a daily life space where we pass by, where we stop, where we discuss.
These are the big themes of public space as we define them.
With all these big themes, we combine about all the questions linked to public spaces.
So, should we say public space or public spaces?
The distinction is made by Thierry Paquot, which is very useful here.
Public spaces is when we are talking about something physical, it's the network support, the question of the organization of architecture, the question of urban design.
But we understand that the public spaces it's the network of roadways, of spaces.
And we have on the other hand, public space which is the political space, as it is defined by Habermas.
It is connected with political sciences, the social sciences here, and more with architecture, as we saw earlier.
And it's the space of politics, therefore the space of protest.
There it is.
Between the public space which is an immaterial space, space of the politic of protest and public spaces which are the material and spatial network of streets and places.
We have a cursor, like this, which shifts more to one side, or more so to the other with a possible superposition in the middle, at once of a space of protest which would be a real and physical space.
And the example we most often have in mind for this type of things is La Sorbonne in Abidjan which was in any case before the crisis, the perfect place of protest or at least of a part of the protest.
Of course, there was only part of the population that came out.
But where, freely, more or less freely, we are going to discuss about political questions, about societal questions.
And then at the same time, this space is quite real, since it's a public space where people can go.
So we have at the same time the question of the immaterial of protests and the question of the public material space.
So it's for this as well as to facilitate, we go from public space to public spaces.
So when we speak of public space or of public spaces, we have seen the difference.
We must talk about public domain.
It's often the network, of roadways and places that belong to their local collectives.
Okay.
And then there are the spaces open to the public.
Spaces that can be private but are considered public spaces since everyone can have access.
It's the case, in particular of big private markets.
So, we must make the clear distinction between the virtual space of protest, the public space.
Public spaces which are the network of streets, of spaces, that are physically there.
The public domain which is really, which corresponds to the land title and the spaces which are open to the public, but which are not.
These are the private spaces.
During our research we have been able to put forth a certain number of structuring factors of space.
I am referring to the bibliography and the book "The West-African City".
But like its thesis, we have been able to put forth that there are three structuring factors.
The first, is the question of climate.
The fact that we are in a warm and humid climate where the hot and dry considerably influence what we are going to find and the way in which people are going to move in the public space.
The second idea in our synthesis, is that public spaces are first and foremost the place of the populace.
It is here that the majority of the poor live.
There is a clear division between rich and poor in the public space, and the public space is first and foremost the place for the poorest population.
The rich only pass through, most of the time by car.
Finally, the third structuring element, is the question of informality.
The informality which structures a part of the public space, since a part of social practices that take place here are of an exclusive domain of formality or informality.
Here we had the example, earlier, between public space and public spaces of La Sorbonne in Abidjan.
Another image, is it really a public space?
A kind of no man's land which is in fact a road.
I leave it an open question.
In central Dakar, we see that if we focus on our themes, we have at the same time questions about resources, people live, conduct business in these streets and at the same time questions about transportation in this image.
The environment, the public space is also a space of waste storage but also a place of storage of any kind.
Another example where finally there is a sort of privatization of public space since the merchant and the carpet manufacturer are drying them out in full sun, in the street and appropriates the available space.
Which makes it so that the cars can no longer pass by.
So it's a very clear way here to appropriate a public space.
Finally, public space is also to do sports: soccer or its reduced version.
We are going to see now the development of a public space a big square in the center of N'Djamena.
Thanks to Google and the map history, we can go back like this, from 2004 to 2011, and we are going to gradually see the changes that happened in the creation of public spaces.
So there is no value judgement about what has been done.
Is it good, not good?
I just want to show the process that is in motion when public spaces are created in places which are already urbanized.
It takes places gently.
Here we are in 2008, 2009, 2010 also in 2010, some destruction, and here we have a space that takes the whole of the homes that we had before.
We finish with this image.
Maybe if we go on Google today, there will be the following.
I leave you with the care to go and see it.
We are in N'Djamena, Tchad.
And we now going to see an example from the same work which I was talking about earlier, 
"The West-African City" where a method of capturing public space was developed.
A method which allows us to see the daily changes that happen in the public space.
For this we have placed our camera and we have taken a photo throughout the day of a public space.
We are in Nouakchott, an ordinary downtown street and every 30 minutes, we took a photo.
So we can see the movements which take place throughout the day.
All these movements allowed us to evaluate the number of men and women.
For example, if I take this x axis here, we have the time or the hours from early in the morning until late in the evening.
And here we have the number of men and women.
So what interests us, is not the exact number since it largely depends on the framing that we do.
What interests us, is the balance of men and women.
And we see that there are very, very few women and that we don't see them the whole day.
They are there at precise hours.
We can do the same thing with the children.
We can do the same thing with vehicles.
Another example, another framing in another village.
We see here that the presence of women is much more important, and that the women are present the whole day.
This allows to see the rhythm of the city, at which time the city awakens, at which time we have the most people walking in the public space.
This allows us to quantify a certain number of things.
Another example, without any comments.
Another street in Nouakchott, early in the morning, a seller.
Look carefully at the right hand side of your screen, what is going to happen.
There. At a certain time, one seeks protection from the sun.
At certain hours, there is no one in the street.
At other hours, we see many cars.
And we see, throughout the day, the sale of fruits, of bananas.
We see the bananas disappear gradually as the buyers arrive in this tore.
There, very quickly described, some themes of public spaces, some structuring elements, the creation of a public space, a solid example
N'Djamena, and a method of research which allows the capturing like this, of the public space throughout the day.
