When it comes to the risk management of bond portfolio duration and convexity are the basic measures. 
Duration and convexity are the first and second order sensitivity measures of bond prices with respect
to parallel shifts of the yield curve. 
So let's consider a fixed coupon bond with cash flow dates T1, 
T2 up to Tn.
So with maturity Tn, and let's assume that the cash flows at Ti are also containing the principle at maturity just for the sake of notation. 
To further simplify the notation, we assume that small t now is zero, so that we don't have to write Ti minus small t all the time, and we also abbreviate the Ti yield just by the letter yi.
So then we have seen and we have learned that the price, at time zero of this bond is given by the sum of the discounted cash flow Ci.
The question we're going to study now, how does this price change?
The duration of the bond is defined as the relative first-order sensitivity with respect a parallel shift of the yield curve. 
Formally speaking, let s denote the parallel shift then, we differentiate the price of the bond as a function of s with respect to S at S equal to zero
We divide it by the current prize and we take a minus sign in font by convention in order to get a positive expression.
From that expression, we can also see that the duration is a weighted average of the coupon payment dates 
Ti up to Tn.
In other words, the duration of zero coupon bond with maturity T, is simply given by T. 
We thus obtain the first-order approximation for relative bond prize changes with respect to a parallel shift delta y of the yield curve. 
As an example, assume that the yield curve is flat 3% and consider a bond with maturity in 10 years and annual coupon payments of 6% on the principle of 100. 
It's price is 125.14 to duration plugging in the formula, you can compute is given by 8.06.
As a second example, we're again assume the U-curve is flat 3% and we consider a five year maturing bond with annual coupons of 3% on the principle of 100. 
Again, it is an easy exercise to compute the price and the duration. 
Now let's apply the duration to immunize the value of the bond portfolio with respect to small parallel shifts of the yield curve. 
So let us by pie of s, the value of a portfolio to be hedged as a function of the yield shift s.
Let H(s) denote the value of the hedging instrument as function of s. 
Now immunization, with respect to small parallel shift of the yield curve then means we want to find q, the number of hedging instrument we want to hold, such that the hedge portfolio is first-order immune against parallel shifts of the yield curve. 
Now the solution is given by this expression which again is given in terms with the duration of the portfolio to be hedged and the duration of the hedging instrument. 
Let's look at an example and let's revisit the examples 1 and 2 from the bond duration. 
Let's immunize a long position in one 10 year bond with 6% coupons by holding q units of the 5 year bong with 3% coupon.
Given what we have seen on the previous slide, the solution is given by - 2.14.
This means that one should short 
2.14 units of the 5 year bonds in order to hedge one long unit of the 10 year bond. 
This figure shows us the performance of this hedge. 
The red line is the value change of the immunized portfolio as a function of the yield shift s. 
In other words, when there is no yield shift the value change is zero, and as we can see from this figure, no matter whether the yield  curve shifts up or down the value change is positive.
In this case, that's a good hedge.
The convexity of the bond is defined  as a relative second-order sensitivity with respect to a parallel shift of the yield curve. 
Formally speaking, here is the bond price as function of the yield curve shift s. 
We take the second-order derivative at s equal zero and we divide by the current price p.
This is what we get. 
With the convexity and the duration, we obtain a second-order approximation for relative bond price changes with respect to a parallel shift of the yield curve.
Now combining duration and convexity we can immunize the value of a bond portfolio with respect to small and not so small parallel shifts of the yield curve. 
Let's again consider a portfolio with value pie s as function of the yield shift s. 
Now let's consider two hedging instruments.
The fist one having value H1 of s and the second one, H2 of s. 
We want to find q1 and q2 such that the portfolio consisting of the original portfolio plus q1 units of the first hedging instruments plus q2 units of the second hedging instrument is having a zero first-order sensitivity with respect to parallel shifts and a zero second-order sensitivity with respect to parallel shifts. 
The above system can be equivalently expressed as a linear system in terms of the duration and the convexity of the original portfolio and the hedging instruments, along with their initial prices. 
This is  a simple linear 
2 by 2 system to solution as given by inverting the 2 by 2 matrix as shown on that line. 
D pie denotes the duration of pie,
C pie denotes convexity of pie, and similarly DHi and CHi denote the duration and convexity of the hedging instrument Hi. 
As a numerical example, we consider a portfolio with price 32, 863.5, duration 6.76 and convexity 85.329. 
Along with this portfolio we consider 2 hedging instruments with price duration and complexity data given here.
This data is enough to find the positions in the hedging instruments q1 and q2 such that the hedged portfolio is immunized to parallel shifts of the yield curve. 
The solution is you should buy 
140.3 units of the second hedging instruments and sell short 304.8 units of the 1st hedging instruments. 
