If we take the ratios we train at the Yaoundé school of medicine, in radiology, roughly 6 to 7 radiologists a year.
And in Cameroon there are roughly 100 radiologists that work for 20 million inhabitants, but the problem is that if we take these numbers, we think it's not bad!
They are not equally dispatched,
They are concentrated in the urban areas, in the big cities and there are whole regions without radiologists.
So there is a problem with the amount, and a problem with the spatial dispatching.
And what do they say?
They say if you send me to the outskirts,
I get there and there is no equipment!
So what I have learnt,
I am not going to apply it,
I am going to forget everything, why would I go there?
So this is why they will do anything to stay in the urban areas and cities.
I started doing
MRI scans.
But I don't know if I can turn on a MRI machine on, because when I started the machine broke down.
What I learnt, I am forgetting little by little because the machine doesn't work and the special exams, we never do any.
So I don't know what to do if I have to do one one day.
I don't know if i could do it without help maybe from a book or
I don't know
Those are the difficulties we encounter in our field.
We forget for example the doses
For a child, a thorax child, we forget the doses and the working parameters and we can over-radiate an organ whilst the practice of the training would permit us to keep up an acceptable level.
Obviously when we don't work for a while like a muscle that we don't use, it gets weaker the brain could lose everything at least its working speed or memory of parameters or certain positions to acquire the adequate images.
I think the principal problem is really the personnel, because generally we can manage to buy an echograph machine when we don't yet know how to use it
And once the machine is there either we will try to train someone or we ask the minister and sometimes we are given a young person that just finished his or her training and is still looking to learn.
So for me the main problem, is the human ressources for using the machines.
Compared to the rural zones, as you have seen the equipment in these zones is used by personnel who is getting old on one hand and on the other hand who is not well trained.
So it would be best if we did some training courses to do so we would need to bring them to the city, to do short training programs to use the equipment better and be able to do exams they don't know how to do because they don't know how to use the technology.
We can't allow in our countries, high quality equipment equal to those in Europe if we don't have locally based personnel properly trained.
When we have a project for example to equip a hospital or a medical imagery center, we only think about the equipment, and not those who will use it, and who will maintain it, and who will look after it for the maintenance and daily running.
