In the previous session we talked about the services, the smart city services, and the challenges posed by these services.
In this session, we'll talk about the challenges posed to the urban infrastructures by the smart cities.
And we identify three such challenges. 
First, it's the challenge of standards, setting the standards. 
Then it's the challenge of setting the right political priority.
And thirdly, it's the challenge of financing, financing the infrastructures. 
So let's first talk about the standards. 
Now, the standards here we have already seen.
In the first week we have seen the question of telecom infrastructures.
The first challenge here is which kind of network to use. 
Are we using an existing telecom network?
Usually, it's a historical provider, or is the city developing a dedicated smart city telecommunications network?
And the question of course is if we are using a new network, who is going to pay for it?
Then, the second challenge is the interconnection. 
We have also seen in the first week that all the devices, all these smart devices need to be connected to each other via the networks, via the telecommunication networks. 
And so, the big challenge here is really the challenge of which standards are we going to use?
Are we going to have one single standard, or if we cannot have one single standard, then how good is it for the smart city? 
So who is defining these standards, is it the telecom operator?
The existing one or the new one?
In case the city develops a dedicated network, is it the infrastructure provider, that is the utilities?
Let's say the energy companies or the water companies that may have already their own telecommunications fiber network in there, and they are basically setting the standards for everybody else?
Is it the industry, the different industries that are involved?
Let's say the transportation industry itself is setting the standards among themselves. 
But which industry, is actually energy industry, transportation industry that would be the two biggest ones. 
Or is the city setting the standards? 
But, here also, the question is you know, which city as we have already said several times, we are generally talking about metropolitan areas that involve several cities.
So setting standards by cities also requires coordination among cities to set the standards.
I think currently these kinds of questions are not yet answered but need to be addressed.
The second challenge that smart cities pose to urban infrastructures is the challenge of setting the right political priorities.
And we see three such challenges.
First, I think the city needs to get clear whether it wants to be about infrastructure development and putting in the infrastructures, or whether it basically wants to promote itself as a smart city, more on the marketing kind of side. 
Each of them has risks. 
You can develop the infrastructure, and the smart city doesn't really follow.
Or you can just promote the smart city, but then you don't really have the infrastructure in order to follow upon the marketing that you made. 
The second big question or challenge in terms of political priorities is whether you focus rather on infrastructures, infrastructure development including telecommunications infrastructures?
Or whether, as a city, you focus on smart city services?
So, setting up the infrastructures and hoping first, and hoping that the services will arise, setting the right infrastructures, the right standards and then automatically the smart city services will arise.
Or as a city, you want to be into smart services smart health services, smart transportation services, smart kind of city services. 
That's I think the second big question, political question that a city has to ask itself. 
And the third big question is on which of the dimensions of a smart city to actually focus?
At least in terms of priority, should we start with transports?
Smart transport with smart energy with smart public services?
Something else, smart buildings?
But, you usually cannot do everything at the same time. 
So which are the most urgent problems where you reap the most rapid benefits, and this I think is the second big challenge for a city. 
The challenge of setting the right priorities.
The third big challenge that smart cities pose to urban infrastructures, is in terms of financing.
In the first week of this MOOC,
I have already talked about the tendency that the value-added for the city, thanks to this digital layer, is moving to the services layer.
Potentially, the profits are rather made at the services layer than at the infrastructure layer.
This, I think, is a general tendency of digitalization.
Now, what does that mean for smart cities and smart city infrastructures?
As a city you need to make sure that the services, the smart city services providers are not just simply taking an advantage, cream-skimming the urban infrastructure without putting any money back into this infrastructure.
They are profiting, let's say a pier-to-pier taxi service will take advantage of the infrastructure, but does not really put anything back into that infrastructure.
And so the challenge that arises here, basically a regulatory challenge for a city is to make sure that some of the profits that are made
at a services layer get reinvested back into the infrastructure. 
And this is not just for transport, this is for energy, for water, and all the value-added services that are made at the digital services layer. 
So reinvesting and regulating reinvestment into the infrastructure,
I think, is the second big issue.
And the third big issue here is of course, the investment in the smart city itself. 
So we have seen that the smart city needs networks.
We have previously talked about telecommunication networks.
It needs devices, smart devices, in order to be operational.
And typically, these kind of things have to be paid for, either by the city itself, or by the private investors.
But if you want to have private investors, the city needs to set the conditions for this to be attractive to private investors.
That's another big challenge for financing urban infrastructures.
To conclude, in the previous session we have talked about the challenges that smart cities pose to the services layer.
In this session, we have talked about the three challenges to the infrastructure layers of a smart city.
Namely, standards, political priorities, and financing.
Now in the next session we will summarize all these challenges across the three layers and see what these challenges mean for smart city managers.
Stay tuned. 
