Welcome back.
In this session, I will summarize the main strategic issues that City Managers have to address.
And these strategic issues we distinguish them along the three main layers:
Infrastructure, Services, and Data or Digital Layer.
Now, let us start with the Digital Layer, with the Data Layer, because his is the real novelty in Smart City and probably the most important layer to pay attention to.
We distinguish 5 areas, in which you have to make strategic decisions.
We just put here the main things to consider.
So, on the Data Layer, let's look at the technological strategic decisions and here the main question is really about standards.
Which standards for the
Telecom Infrastructure? which standards for the devices?
So that everything is optimal interconnected.
On the financial side, this is the question of the pricing of the data.
How much are you prepared to pay for the data?
Are they open data?
Are they free?
Who pays for the data, ultimately?
On the political side, it's a question of regulation.
Of course, managers do not regulate but, managers will behave differently depending on whether the data layer is regulated as an infrastructure with basic questions of access?
Or whether it is regulated as services that are competing against each other.
On the social dimension, the typical questions, the typical strategic decision that have to be made are about data ownership.
Are these data owned by the citizens themselves?
Are they owned by the city?
Are they owned by the operators?
Are they owned by the carriers?
The Telecom operators?
So, here these kinds of strategic decisions need to be made and of course, also decisions about levels of privacy that need to be granted.
And on the environmental side, there are all kinds of considerations, strategic decisions about the life cycle of digitalization.
We all know that many of these digital devices also have environmental impact and we have to consider and strategically decide about these digital devices.
Now, let's look at the Services Layer, okay?
Now, we have already mentioned before that the main challenge here on the technological side is really services integration.
It's about making it possible that services can be linked to each other, that they can be bundled, and they can be offered as a bundle.
On the financial side, it's the whole strategic decision about competition and cooperation.
Competition and cooperation amongst the services providers but also competition cooperation amongst services themselves.
On the political side,
It's the whole question of the type of services that you want to develop.
Services rather for the citizens, rather commercial services, rather transport, rather in other areas.
So those are strategic decision to make
On the social side,
It's the whole question of
Digital Divide.
How inclusive do you want to be?
What kind of solutions do you offer to citizens who are not capable to fully participate in the digital world.
As we have already seen, also, was the question of liability.
If something goes wrong, if some of these services are not satisfactorily provided.
Who is ultimately liable?
The service provider?
The infrastructure provider?
The Telecom operator?
Who ever.
And on the environmental side,
I think the fundamental strategic decision is whether you want these services to really respond to the changing citizen behaviour, consumer behaviour or, whether you want these services to ultimately optimize the existing urban infrastructure systems.
Now, on the infrastructure themselves
I think technologically the first question to... the first strategic decision to make is, how to integrate new infrastructures?
New buses, new smart meters into the legacy infrastructures?
How do you integrate these kinds of things?
On the financial side, it's of course the question of who pays for the digital infrastructure?
Who pays for the smart meters?
Who pays for all kinds of devices and even the Telecom infrastructure that is necessary?
On the political side, one has to be aware of the longterm impact of  these decisions.
We are talking about infrastructure, so, whatever technology is being bought or implemented will be there for quite a long time. so it is important to make the right strategic decision.
On the social side, there are of course, all kinds of externalities
 with urban infrastructures.
Some parts of the city, some citizens may bare the cost of these externalities while other ones may take profits.
And these are considerations managers have to make, and finally, on the environmental side, there are of course, also life cycle considerations of the infrastructures themselves.
So, in this session we have now talked about the strategic decisions that managers may need to make.
In the next session, we will talk about the decisions that policy makers need to make.
So stay tuned.
