Welcome back.
In this session, we will now talk about the strategic decisions that policy-makers will have to make in order to move towards a smart city.
And we will use the same distinction along the three different layers.
Namely, the infrastructure, the services, and the digital or data layer.
At the end, we will briefly conclude the entire MOOC.
Now, in this matrix, you see the three different layers.
You will also see the five different dimensions.
So first, let's move along the digital layer.
The first considerations, the technological considerations that policy-makers need to make, is to decide whether they want to rely on their own companies, on local startups, or whether they want to use the knowledge and the expertise of global players.
Then on the financial side, they have to make a basic decision whether they want the digital and the data layer to be market driven or public policy driven.
Are the data a market by which they attract companies?
Or are they an object of public policy that they try to implement?
On the political side, the big decisions, the strategic decisions, are about privacy as a matter of regulation. 
How much privacy?
And of course, it's always a question about ownership.
Who owns the data, ultimately, is a political decision.
On the social dimension,
I think there is a big policy decision about digital literacy.
Do the city politicians want to promote digital literacy and sort of have their citizens be the leaders in digital literacy?
Or do they simply want to have the citizens adapt to this kind of digital challenges.
On the environmental side, of course there are a lot of broader environmental considerations about digitalization.
How much environmental impact does digitalization ultimately have?
And how much environmental good does digitalization ultimately bring?
On the services layer,
I think the politicians and policy-makers have to make a decision as to whether the city is simply a user of a platform that they have bought from somewhere.
Or whether the city is on its own a platform owner and a platform provider for other users.
On the financial side, the question is whether they want to enable the development of services, encourage the development of services by others, or whether they want to develop the services themselves. 
On the political side, this is the question of the governance of the services.
We have already seen through sharing economy, there are new companies where the citizens get involved
 in the services themselves.
And this raises totally new questions for policy makers as to how to govern the new smart services that are provided in a city.
And on the social side, we have already seen previously, that the big strategic decisions are about the universal services' obligations.
That is, what kind of services, what minimal services, that the citizens are ultimately entitled to in the digital age.
And the on the environmental side, it's more a strategic decision as to whether to let the services evolve by themselves, Laissez-fair, or whether the cities want to incentivize the behavior of the citizens, so as they use rather green services.
On the infrastructure side, and as we have seen previously, the big strategic decision for policy-makers is of course, whether to use the existing network, or whether to develop or to buy
a dedicated network for the smart city.
On the financial side, we have previously discussed, and we summarize here again.
It's the whole question of sustainable financing in a context where the value added
is actually moving to the digital layer.
So the question of how to generate the money that is ultimately flowing back into the urban infrastructures.
On the political side, it's a little bit the  question of the development of infrastructures for smart city.
Or wether it's more about the promotion and marketing side to promote the city as a smart city.
On the social side, the whole question is: 
"The smart city for whom?"
Who is really the goal of the smart city?
The citizens?
The inhabitants of the city?
Or is it ultimately about the competitiveness of a city, in an increasingly competitive global economic environment.
And on the environmental side, the question that policy-makers have to ask themselves,
How central is the environmental issues ultimately for them?
And that will decide what type of infrastructure they will put in. 
Now there are two more things
I want to say before we conclude this MOOC.
We have always insisted that we talk about urban systems, about socio-technical systems.
Now for pedagogical reasons we have treated transportations, smart urban transportation systems, and smart urban energy systems separately.
But we should not forget that ultimately we are talking about a system of systems.
With subsystems being: the water system, the sewage system, the housing system, the green infrastructure systems, all of them being connected to each other.
And thanks to the digitalization, becoming even more integrated.
And services also becoming even more integrated as a result of that.
So first we mark the systemic nature of urban infrastructure systems.
The second thing 
I want to talk about when looking into the future, is technological developments.
Now we have very much insisted in this MOOC on the digital technologies.
And the progress made in the digital technologies as a game changer for urban infrastructure systems.
But, there isn't just digitalization, there are a lot of other technological developments that affect the various urban infrastructures.
So let's look at some of them.
In the transportation sector, we see substantial technological progress towards self-driving vehicles and that will be another step in the changing urban mobility systems.
We also see a lot of substantial technological changes, in terms of storage, batteries, which will ultimately make a link between vehicles and urban energy systems.
We see a lot of technological developments in electricity generation, more and more decentralized, more and more efficient generation.
Other technological developments,
In terms of drinking water and waste water treatment, which become much more efficient.
In terms of recycling, we see technologies for waste treatment, for waste handling, making the urban resources much more circular.
In terms of housing, we see a lot of progress in terms of materials, making buildings more efficient, smarter, and resilient.
And also in green infrastructures.
There is a lot of technological development in terms of genetic engineering, actually bringing the green infrastructure more and more into the entire urban system and metabolism.
To conclude, in this MOOC, you have learned about what it takes to transit toward a smart city.
We have particularly focused on the three layers.
All along, we have made this distinction, between the infrastructure layer, the services layer, and the new digital layer in between.
Which is the novelty of the smart city.
We have also shown you how these layers are related to each other.
And we have shown you two examples.
Namely, smart urban transportation, and smart urban energy systems.
And we truly hope, that you have enjoyed this course.
Finally, do not forget to finish the mandatory assignments, and if you are interested, to write the optional case.
And then, please stay connected.
Through our website, iglus.org or through the social media.
Thank you so much.
