In the first session, we have expressed several statements on fundamental points: what space is, why it matters, and how to address it.
In the next two sessions, we'll begin to apply this first block of notions to two seemingly heterogeneous realities: the world, the most encompassing human environment, and the individual, the most basic operator in a society.
As for the world, we will see the apparent complication of this subject can be turned into complexity, that is, something sophisticated but made simpler thanks to reasoning, concepts and models.
And here, let me tell you, a spatial perspective can really be useful.
The world, an evident geographical reality, but so big, so complicated.
Can we identify some simple ideas to think it out?
The world has, of course, something to do with "global" and with "globalization".
But how?
In this session, we'll begin with a general discussion about the emergence of a relevant world-scale space.
Then, we will propose a multi-stage historical view of this process.
Finally, we'll try to present as simple as possible modelling to address today's globality.
Let's begin with three defnitions.
The world is the most encompassing human-inhabited space.
In this meaning, World has a capital W.
Its extent is currently the planet Earth, a natural environment with which co-spatiality is less and less optional.
The process of invention of this emerging reality is called globalization.
Globalization is the process through which the world becomes not only the frame including other spaces, but a relevant space in itself.
Globality means, for any social reality, its global dimension.
The global dimension is present in any spatial configuration.
Globality can be addressed at any scale.
Looking at the past, if we try to give dates and place the origin of globalization in the scope of human history, we immediately realize it's not easy.
If, now, we look into the future, a forecast of how the world will look like tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, is by far more trivial.
Many decisive bifurcations are emerging or will emerge later.
These bifurcations can alter the horizon of globalization,
Is it irreversible, its content, what will a globalized world look like?
And the modalities of globality, how will globalization happen?
Globalization is an event with geographical content.
To study it, geographers should take into account its contrasting temporalities, which overlap and interact.
As we have seen in session one, taking into consideration what the actors want can be useful, as it allows us not to be content with [inaudible] tendencies, what positivism-inspired forecasts classically do, but to seize the weak signals that develop rapidly, and can become somtimes suddenly the major components of a given situation.
Thus, what can be called ecological awareness, a notion we will examine more in-depth in session seven, which clearly fuels political debates around the open notion of sustainable development, has profoundly influenced the images of globalization and globality.
Globalization not only includes material objects and actions on these objects, but also a moving set of active spatial representations.
When we first had the opportunity to see the Earth from the outer space in the late '60s, it was not only a new image but a new <i>reality</i> which was offered to us.
Contemporary globalization, more precisely the contemporary phase of globalization, is a process whose one major novelty comes from the fact that it is conceived, discussed, desired or feared, dreamt, transformed into myth, narrative or ideology, in brief, represented, at the same moment as it is made as an objective phenomenon.
You can be in favor, or in opposition to what you call "globalization," which is not neccesarily the definition your colleague or neighbor has in mind.
Anyway, there is no time lapse between thought and agency.
It is even the opposite.
Acting follows imaging.
A significant difference from other worldwide events, such as the discovery of the Americas,
World War 1, or the totalitarian movements of the 20th century, can be observed.
In all these global events, representations of what was happening were generally constructed according to a model conceived for other objects, and originally deployed at other scales than that of the world.
It could be argued, however, that some representations of the world as such were present very early in the colonial conquests carried out by European states.
But, these images were confined to a specific sphere, mainly geopolitical.
Current visions of globalization, that reduce the event to its economic dimension, or which are derived from issues of a different nature, are comparable.
So, globalization is not always comprehended with its full significance.
However, essentially, the actors of globalization think about globalization and speak about it at the same time that they are inventing it.
This singlularity has encompassed a double characteristic.
The emergence of a worldwide scene, where great issues are at stake, largely diffuse tools of knowledge and communication, which make possible an informed exchange between citizens.
Globalization can then be approached from a cognitive point of view, as a moment and an act of knowledge.
Stated otherwise, globalization is not only a context, which it is, of course, but also a text, a paradigm, an epistemy, a referential, constructed at the same time as it is used, in different registers and by different types of operators.
From this perspective, the analysis of the discourses produced should include the exploration of the cognitive competencies of the ordinary players, and set aside the idea that these representations would only be illusions that science would have the mission to overcome.
From indivudual actors, to scholars and other kinds of experts, there exists a continuum that demands caution in the establishment of epistemological boundaries.
This doesn't mean that science-oriented research does not have questions, methods or goals of its own, but it is necessary to go farther, and to place all these cognitive approaches, including our own, with a comprehensive, in both meanings of the word, set, that specifically helps us to better understand the dynamic of this complex machinery that globalization is.
The Earth is approximately
4.5 billion years old.
The world is a much more recent reality.
We can easily imagine a situation where societies would be scattered all over the planet, and wouldn't have any relations with each other.
That is to say, they would be separated by infinte distances. and a large number of small worlds would then exist, but not one world.
In this situation, the word "World," as a proper noun, would have no significant meaning.
The idea of a World with a capital W can make sense when and only when the distance relationships between societies of their parts, to change.
If I can represent myself or my environment as near or far from another individual, or another society, this means I could at least in imagination be nearer or farther from them.
Thus, every single person or object, that is located on the Earth's surface, is somehow tied in a systemic device, which is not reducible to the sum of its components.
If we see the world in this way, then we can immediately admit that globalization, the invention of the world, is a geographical event that began a long time ago.
Many confusing things have been said about the beginning of mankind.
The natural history of mammals and primates is often uncontrollably mixed with the social history of humankind.
But as a species, that is to say, with approximately the same transferrable genetic material,
Homo sapiens is only 200,000 years old.
It is true that there have been, on Earth, other intelligent species, some contemporary with Homo sapiens, such as the Neanderthals, some having disappeared much earlier.
But the genetic material of each of these supposed biological cousins or remote ancestors actually shows significant discontinuities with Homo sapiens.
Each of these species had their own history, which is not ours.
The idea of a trans-species human history is dangerous, because it confuses biological temporality, evolution, with social temporality, history.
This confusion can easily lead to finalist narratives, and to the myth of a biological predestination of the social world.
Therefore, let's remain careful when we have a look at the geography of the humanoids til the emergence of Homo sapiens in Africa, two thousand centuries ago.
This moment marked the beginning of prehistory: that is, history.
This map shows a synthesis of human migrations during all the Paleolithic era.
The present-day [Cumenae], including the Pacific islands, has been totally occupied only recently, no more than a thousand years ago.
As archaeological findings show, there is a correspondence between the first movements out of Africa between 100,000 and 80,000 years ago and the advent of high-significance technological innovations such as sophisticated tools,
Mousterian and Aterian industries.
Long-distance mobility appears, therefore, as a constitutive characteristic of advanced human societies.
This observation contrasts with Martin Heidegger's view, which associates inhabiting,
<i>wohnen</i> in German, to nearness and immobility.
Heidegger rejects modern technologies of speed as part of a forgetfulness of being, and of the dimension of care that is present in the situated practices humans experience in their existence, <i>Dasein</i>.
This approach can be interpreted as a glorification of the riveted-to-the-ground rural societies.
But this reality represents a small part of all history over time and space.
Moreover, the maps we have just seen show that mobility is not a post-rural phenomenon, but clearly started before the beginning of farming, which appeared approximately
10,000 years before today.
The sedentary nature of rural societies is more of an exception than a rule in human history.
Contemporary mobility is closing the incidental period of an immobile society, and creates a certain similarity of our practices with our Paleolithic ascendants.
We can also identify continuity between the first migrations and our times in another way.
One outcome of our ancestors' migrations is that they have progressively created many of the places we now live in.
Some of them have disappeared, of course, but not all, and the newly-invented ones, in the course of history, have generally linked up to pre-existing ones.
Let's imagine a counterfactual history.
We know that Paleolithic migrations have to be related to the predatory system of this period.
Groups of people depleted their local resources, and were therefore forced to move.
But if the Neolithic revolution had bloomed before global migration, the increase of soil yield, namely through irrigated farming, would have allowed the whole of mankind to stay in the same region, and the population might have grown to a dramatic extent, but in the same area.
Then, the stock of places existing all over the world would have been reduced to a restrictive number.
Now, these numerous and diverse places are the fundamental resource of what has become one of the most productive sectors: tourism.
In 2012, for the first time, the activity created by the crossing of an international border to visit a place generated more than
1,000 billion US dollars of receipts.
This industry of elsewhere has been made possible because the elsewhere makes sense.
The production of these many elsewheres began with Homo sapiens' first long-distance migrations.
