Globalization is not an elementary, linear process but has a long, complicated story.
We can consider Paleolithic migrations as the first step towards globalization.
In the continuation, six other stages can be identified.
After the Age One, defined by the diffusion of Homo Sapiens on the planet, we can identify six great globalizations or rather six phases of the same globalization process.
These phases often overlap.
They can be subdivided and follow the logic that is sometimes contradictory.
Connection, the beginning of relations between the different societies located on the planet.
The completion of the exploration of the earth during the Age of Discovery by Europeans at the end of the 15th century, must be put into perspective.
The technical capacity of coastal shipping to face strong headwinds completed a process of generalized connections between societies that had taken place for centuries in their old world, the Eurasiafrica stretching up to the Pacific Northwest, peopling the Americas, and with the South Pacific Islands more or less linked to South America.
The Muslim space constituted one of the principal links of this world.
It was structured on exchanges, such as along the Silk Road that was decisive for the empires that controlled a piece of it only, and was more durable than these empires.
We can approach this era by following the journeys of Marco Polo along the Silk Road, a major trade link between the eastern and western part of Eurasia as we can see on the following map.
This stage of globalization appears modern in the sense that it was based more on the research of information and the rationale of commercial transactions than on conquest and power, leading to territorial control.
Inclusion: the forced incorporation into worldwide empires.
Overlapping with the preceding phase, that of the colonization of the planet by a limited number of interacting empires, characterizes this moment.
Western Europe, joined at the end of this period by the United States, detaches itself and becomes a unique actor in this globalization.
Europe acts, others must submit.
As [Christian Waterloo] has shown, two types of positions should be distinguished, those which aim to provide goods not available in Europe-- search for otherness-- and those that project a given society beyond its borders-- search for mimetic reproduction.
Beyond the destruction of civilizations, which was not a new phenomenon but took here a radical turn, the most salient fact was the contradiction between exploitation-- which manifests itself by a predatory inclusion of men, institutions, cultures, raw materials-- and diffusion, which integrates, for better or worse, the colonies into a sphere of the colonizer's culture, involuntarily providing the dominated people with their values of liberty, equality and progress which help them in their emancipation.
Internationalization: the creation of a worldwide space of exchange.
The sequence is situated between 1849,
British overall control over India, and 1939 at the apogee of imperial systems.
To a certain extent, the openness of developed economies is comparable to the contemporary sequence.
Two key elements set them apart, however-- on one hand the exchanges of commodities are based on the complementarities of natural origin.
They result from the contrasts in productivity based on climate differences.
This is a continuation of the first type of colonization.
In the next stages, the relative weakening of agricultural and mineral raw materials in trade balances will give the impression of a step backwards, even if this is due to the emergence of more sophisticated productive technologies.
On the other hand, the world wars and the impact of countries closing down in the aftermath of the 1929 economic crisis show that a reversibility of globalization, which does not seem absurd to the majority of people of this era, is always possible at the price of massive diseconomies and considerable destruction.
Globalisation refused: the victorious resistance of states.
The 1914 - 1945 period marks a complete halt in the process of opening.
The two world wars and the treatment of the economic crisis put the states back in the center in their refusal to weaken their prerogatives.
While they were at the pinnacle of their power, the active states easily succeeded in mobilizing their respective societies through their hatred of the other and in a exacerbated nationalism.
Logically, this paroxysm of the state is a low point for globalization.
We must wait for the 1980s to find an economic openness equivalent to that of 1914.
It is true that in between times, the content of these exchanges had profoundly changed from the trade of tropical products shipped to colonial metropolises.
The world of commerce moved to a map of trade, based on the exchange of the same type of manufactured production in both directions, in particular between rich countries.
With the collapse of the Berlin Wall, 1989, marked the end of the communist hypothesis of an imperial couner-globalization, wrapped up in a universalist-like ideology.
Interdependence: acceleration. multidimensionality and irreversibilty.
After 1945, changes in the geopolitical and political context played a considerable role in the return to the processes of globalization of exchanges.
The new element is the growing role of exchanges between comparable spaces, as seen in western Europe, where, during the post war decades, the swing from 25 percent to 60 percent of the international exchanges made on the continent, accompanies the political construction, more than just being a result of this construction.
It is also the moment when giant national firms are bulit, conceived at first in a mercantilist spirit, that is to say, as part of the geopolitical logic that states developed, then changing with the development of transnational firms.
These created an industrial, then financial, more and more international network and this network space made their citizenship elusive.
In the end, the technical aspects, reduction of the cost of transportation, the emergence of digital telecommunication gave an extra push to the process.
It is not simply a question of monetary exchanges.
It is the moment where everything that can be exchanged between different types of operators is actually exchanged.
Businesses, but also nonprofit organizations, can communicate much more quickly and at a volume that has never before been seen.
The current period is characterized by a generalization that emphasizes speed and the changes induced.
An important part of the circulatory dynamic-- fluidity of information, cultural exchanges, increased opportunities for interactions between the inhabitants of the planet-- is very old.
Globalization of science and the arts goes back to the 19th century.
This time, however, all of the exchanges experienced a rapid growth and this multidimensionality includes political debates and issues.
We can follow this political emergence by examining the phenomenon of public opinion-- the protests against the Vietnam War, for example, from 1963 to 1975-- of an increasingly common agenda, in particular about natural environments after the nuclear accident at Chernobyl, 1986, and the Rio Conference in 1992-- of growth in the role of thematic international institutions,
IMF, World Bank, WTO-- and the birth of a legal framework with the International Criminal Tribunal for ex-Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the 1990s.
Cosmopoliticisation: the World-society at stake.
Recently, from a date that is conventionally established as the fall of state communism, 1989, appearing as an alternative to globalization, interdependencies between different places on the planet have become generalized and have reached areas that did not yet belong to the usual sphere of exchanges and public debates.
It would not be absurd to make this phase start in 1945, the trials of Nuremberg marking the introduction of the "crime against humanity" notion and of a worldwide domestic justice conceived to punish this type of crime.
The International Criminal Court,
ICC, created in 1998 and effective since 2002, embodies this idea.
Ever since the last decade of the 20th century the questions of developments such as economic growth, income distribution, education, public health, natural environment, but also of migrations and tourism, have become more visible as explicit world-scale political issues.
The emergence of versatile digital systems connecting almost everyone around the world, including across small, formerly landlocked routes, has made possible a somehow common perception of these topics.
The general issue of globalization can then be defined as the emergence of a complete society at a worldwide level-- of a world society, which will add a new level to geographical situations, of a societal substance already present-- local, regional, national, or in construction, continental-- without substituting them, but by influencing them and being influenced by them.
All of this contributes to make politics the crucial point from which the term, proposed by Immanuel Kant at the end of the 18th century, and recently revisited by Ulrich Beck, 2006, of cosmopolitics.
Only politics deployed on a planetary scale can create, through governmental institutions, public policies, parties, non-state actors, public opinion, minimal cohesion of a societal type, between all of the paths of an already active civil society.
Behind these political debates lie ethical problems.
What are the fundamentals of coexistence on a planetary scale, beyond the incontestable differences between societies?
It is because this type of question cannot be eluded that we can characterize the current process as universalization.
This can give way to paradoxical expressions like the different forms in which globalization is contested and to alternative propositions, more or less coherent.
From the ultra-globalism to Islamist terrorism it is also within anti-system postures, that reinforce the supposedly challenged system.
Those who oppose to all globalization, could be distinguished from those who support a different globalization, that would differ from the one that they blame as dominated by transnational firms and the neoliberal agenda.
In fact, these distinctions are not so simple, because there is an intermix between both attitudes.
The anti-globalization movements combine, in a manner that is more or less coherent, several orientations-- the criticism of capitalism in general, that more specific of its transnational players, the condemnation of the United States, the defence of the nation-state as the ideal and single-level place for economic production, political regulation and social cohesion.
The question of knowing whether globalization will prevail is an issue in itself.
Can we imagine a future for a non-globalized world?
It is not a mere academic query.
Since the last time globalization was rejected, after the crisis of 1929,
World War Two started.
In few words, world-as-society is a major issue of the seventh stage of globalization.
The world is not a full fledged society, but it probably is becoming one.
It is not a society
1) because intercommunal or interstate separations continue to organize a significant part of global-scale social life and profoundly divide the world, and 2) because the interactions that tend to unify the world remain largely based on transactions and therefore lack an assumed political dimension. ♪ (gentle music) ♪
