Welcome to this first session. 
In this session, we will talk about cities as socio-technical systems.
This is the way we are looking at cities in this MOOC.
And infrastructures are a particular type of socio technical-system.
Finally we will look at the implications of this view on the management and the governance of cities and their infrastructures. 
So, cities are a place where people live and work together.
And different people look at this living and working together from different perspectives. So there are people who look at cities as an economic system. 
The generation of wealth, the generation of jobs, the economic interactions, the economic conditions for the workings of a city as an economic system.
Typically economists look at cities as an economic system.
Sociologists rather look at cities as a social system, it's a way of life of cultural life, of social life, of activities, of inequities and all these kind of things.
Then there are people who look at cities as a political system, how the different actors interact with each other, who decides about what, who has power over what. So it is also possible to look at cities as such political systems.
Our approach is to look in particular at cities as a technological system.
Typically the infrastructures constitute the technological system of a city.
And of course all these things are interrelated which exactly makes the city a socio-technical system. 
The way the technology works effects the economy, the way the economy works effects whether you have money to invest in technology the same for the social and political dimensions.
So this is the very systemic view of a city. 
Now more precisely, as we said, the city is a place where people live and work together. 
The infrastructures, the urban infrastructures enable such collective living and working. 
And this is typically done in a systemic fashion.
The infrastructures enable the way that people work, the way that people live, the way that people decide.
You can easily imagine how the infrastructures are built that effects social life. Is it easy to reach the city center or not?
Is the traffic flowing, is it not flowing? Is water available?
All this effects the quality of life, of social life and of economic life of a city. 
But also the other way around the economic and social and political life determines how the infrastructures are maintained, built, invested in, developed. So it is easily understandable that depending on the political decision making processes, investments are done in certain parts of the cities and not done in other parts of the cities. 
Business parks are created here, not there. So typically the city is such a complex socio-technical system that decides upon the infrastructure which in turn decide upon the social life of a city. 
Now, at the same time, one can look a little bit more in detail. 
To look at the infrastructures themselves as a socio-technical system.
And so we have infrastructures, such typical infrastructures, such as transport, housing, buildings, energy, water and other things you can add. Waste water, waste. 
And the way these infrastructures are laid out effect the way that the social and political and economic life of a city is happening.
Inversely, the decisions made at these levels will effect where housing is going to be, whether transport is developed here or there whether energy is renewable or not renewable whether water is cleaned or not cleaned. 
So one can really look at urban infrastructure systems as a socio-technical system in itself as part of a larger urban system.
Now this systemic view of cities clearly has implications on the management and the governance of cities.
The most important concept here is the concept of feedback loops.
So all these elements of the system, of course, interact with each other and create feedback.
The social dimensions interact with the technical dimensions. 
The technical dimensions interact with the economic dimensions and all this creates feedback loops. 
This makes cities very, very complex and the outcomes of what happens in the city is never attributable to one single cause. 
All these elements are related to each other.
And of course, all these things are also path dependent. 
So decisions that have been made at some point in the past deploy their effects later in the future. What happens today, may be caused by an array of complex interactions and feedback loops that come from the past.
Let us illustrate that in the context of cities. So the city is in its environment. And as we said, the city and especially its infrastructure are a complex socio-technical system interacting with each other. 
So there are feedback loops on both sides. 
There are technical feedback loops.
The way housing works effects transport. Transport effects energy.
All these technical feedback loops are going on inside a city. 
Similarly there are social feedback loops. 
The different actors interact with each other. 
What is done economically has an impact on the social life.
What happens socially has an impact on finances, on the economic life. 
And then, of course, even more so there are interactions, as I said before, between the social dimensions and the technical dimensions themselves. 
So how the technology is laid out effects the social life, effects the way people work, whether they get to work or not, whether they have water or not and the other way around, of course, also. 
Now all this, and this is our particular approach to the city, all this leads to certain types of performance of a city.
We have classified performance in terms of efficiency, resilience and sustainability of cities but it is easily understandable that all these feedback loops, the complexity, the path dependency makes the management and the governance of these cities extremely complex, unpredictable and we need to take that fact into account when we manage and govern cities. 
This is basically what our previous
MOOC was all about. 
What is new is this digitalization, the data layer which comes of top of all these cities as a socio technological system.
And what we are going to do in this
MOOC, is to try to understand what digitalization as a new layer coming on top of the systemic view does to the management and the governance of urban infrastructure systems. 
