Welcome back to the course. 
In this session we will talk about digitization.
What is it exactly?
We have structured this session into 4 segments. 
First we will talk about data generation and storage, then about communications and Networks, then we will talk briefly about
Internet of Things and finally we will talk about analytics, data analytics. 
So let us start with data generation, as I am sure you have observed, data is generated from a growing amount of sources. 
Cameras, sensors, RFIDs, GPS, including what we call self-generation, that is the smart phones that you are using are constantly generating and transmitting data and all this data is generated at an ever lower cost and by ever smaller devices. and also the storage capacity where this data can be stored is increasing exponentially. 
Basically all this leads to the fact that there is an unprecedented ever growing amount of data that is being generated. 
So that's the first element of digitization.
The second element is what we call communication and networks and that has 3 different dimensions that all relate to each other.
On the most basic level we have the telecommunications infrastructures. 
Traditionally these are the wired infrastructures, the cables, the fibre but increasingly we have wireless infrastructures also where the capacity is increasing 
1G, 2G, 3G, 4G, WiMax, 
WiFi, satellites.
All this makes up for the telecommunications infrastructures through which data is transmitted. 
The 2nd dimension is the networks, that is the different devices that are being used need to be connected  to each other through the telecommunications infrastructure and this is done by so called protocols, physically connecting the different data storing devices to each other and the 3rd dimension of this is the identification and exchange of this data.
What is typically being called the
World Wide Web, that is the location of this data by way of unique record locators inside the different devices, inside the different computers. 
So adding to the data generation, this second dimension, the communication dimension, connects all the data to each other.
So we have basically 4 things, we have a telecommunications infrastructure, we have the network, that is the devices connected to each other through the internet, and then we have the identification and exchange of the different data of the devices connected to each other thanks to the World Wide Web and, as we have seen in the very beginning, we have the data generation and storage. 
Now all this has a growing capacity, there are more and more things that can be stored, generated, transmitted, it has increasing speed, data is transmitted ever more rapidly, there are reduced power needs, even to the point that some of the devices do not need power anymore such as RFID's, all this at an every lower cost and in an ever smaller format, miniaturized.  
Today you can have, for example,
RFID's directly in each letter in a cost effective manner. 
Now all this together leads to what is currently being called the Internet of Things.
That is the different devices connected to each other, thanks to the Internet and the
World Wide Web and this has 3 main dimensions.
So we have exponentially connected devices, people say that in about 5 years, the amount of devices that will be connected to each other through the internet will double then we have exponentially generated and transmitted data.
Again, for example, people say that in a house in 5 years, the bandwidth that will be used by these devices connected to each other through the internet will take up
50% of all the bandwidth and then we have increasingly real time exchange of data. 
Already today, you can supervise your house remotely though your smart phone in real time, all this together is leading to this phenomenon we call the Internet of Things today. 
Now there is an additional element that we need to talk about and this is analytics.
All this data needs to be analysed and also here, there is a rapid development in the ability and the capacity to analyse and also to visualise these. 
The visualisation is necessary because analytics often cannot really show what the outcome is so the things here that are important are what we all artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep learning tools that basically allow for the intelligent analysis of all these huge amounts of data. 
This has also been called today
Big Data. 
Now.
In our MOOC here, the combination of all these things, the storage, the transmission, the networks and the analytics is what we call digitization. 
It is important to stress that it is the combination of these things that makes up for the digitization, and this digitalisation, as we will see, in the next session has the disruptive effect on absolutely everything and it also has in the session after, as we will see, disruptive effects on cities. 
So stay tuned to the next sessions. 
