Welcome back.
In the previous session we talked about digitalization; what it is.
Now in this session, we will talk about the implications of digitalization. First in general on industries and then on urban infrastructures.
So let's first start with the industries.
Traditionally, in any industry you have a production chain; a physical value chain.
Take a car whereby it is assembled at different stages and ultimately sold to a customer.
The customer is connected to the final element of the value chain which is the retailer in this case.
What changes with digitalization is the fact that you are able to mirror this physical value chain in a data layer.
All the information that is contained in the physical value chain is now so to speak, duplicated, replicated at the digital layer.
The physical layer, the physical value chain still exists; continues to produce cars until the end-consumer/customer but the information about the whole process is now, so to speak in a digital value chain and the customer can now connect directly.
He can order the car on the internet.
He can assemble the car himself.
He can follow how the things have been produced along the stages; what materials have been used, all this so the customer, the interface with the customer now becomes a digital interface.
Think for example on Dell computers which you buy on the internet and you assemble yourself on the internet.
That is the first stage.
The second stage is the fact that the information that are contained in that data layer can be used to produce new services, new business models and have new customers or the same customers. Think about the
Amazon example: the first layer would be that you order your book digitally. It's still produced.
It still arrives physically and the second layer would be that you, as a customer are being offered advice as to other people who bought similar books. What other offers can be made to you and how you could actually profit from the data that are contained in that digital layer.
There are new services and there are new business models. This is a value added on top of the traditional, physical value chain.
There are many industries that are affected by the actual -
Potentially all the industries can be affected by this evolution.
I have put a list here of potential industries that can be affected by this mirroring and by this digitalization.
What are these? Those are the ones that are particularly information intensive. For example, education or health care where a lot of information is contained; is known by the doctors or the teachers and mirroring these information on a digital layer and repackaging them to sell to the customers has a huge, a huge disruptive effect on these industries.
Other examples are non-scalable industries. A typical example here is the taxi industry which has been disrupted by Uber, to take just an example. The industry is really not scalable. It's at the urban level or it's even at the taxi level but aggregating this information and creating new services out of it really disrupts the traditional industry.
Other industries that are particularly vulnerable to digitalization are highly fragmented industries; typically the logistics industries with a lot of players in it will be particularly affected by this digitalization whereby the information can be aggregated and sort of condensed and repackaged to the customer.
Finally there are also the information assymetric industries.
Again, health care where the doctor knows a lot more than you do or government services and the duplication, the mirroring of this information empowers the customer who now also can become some sort of a prosumer, delivering information himself into that digital layer which again can be used for new services.
This is the overall effect of digitalization on, let's say the traditional industry. Potentially any, any activity that has a value chain can be disrupted by digitalization but some are more vulnerable than others.
Now lets look at what that does to cities and urban infrastructures.
The distinction we made in our previous MOOC which is the classical distinction between the infrastructures and the services that are provided on the infrastructure. A road and a transportation service on the basis of the road.
The customer, the citizen is connected to the service, not directly to the infrastructure.
What happens with digitalization is the fact that we introduce a data, a digital layer in between the infrastructure and the service in exactly the same way as I have shown in the previous slide.
This does 2 things similar to what
I said before:
First, it sort of helps to manage the infrastructures more efficiently.
It leads to an optimized physical value chain by the very fact that you know that you have information about this value chain. You have smarter energy management thanks to this digital layers, smarter transport management, smarter waste management and this is typically what is happening in smart cities. The second element is the new types of services that can be provided thanks to that digital layer, thanks to that data layer.
Smart new services, new business models that can emerge.
The city can advise you or the energy company can advise you about your behaviour, about saving energy, offering you new types of services; combining even infrastructures.
Your behaviour; let's say you have an electric car and your mobility behaviour combined with your energy behaviour.
Let's look at that again in terms of what that means for smart city:
The first dimension, the smart infrastructure management leads to what we call
City 1 plus something. 
It is basically a process of optimization, of incremental innovation, of improving the existing systems thanks to the digital layer.
The second dimension which we then call City 2.0 is really the disruptive changes, the qualitative changes.
No longer the incremental changes by offering new types of services thanks to the digital layer; energy service, transport service let's say waste services, green services, all these kind of things.
The smart city has to be looked at really in terms of these 2 things:
1) the incremental innovation on optimizing the infrastructure thanks to the digital layer and
2) the qualitative change in the services, in even the business models for the services.
We will go into more details later on but I think this is a good description of the 2 types of things the smart city actually brings.
Stay tuned.
