Welcome back.
In the previous session, we talked about the general implications of digitalization.
In this session, we will talk about the implications of digitalization on cities, their performance, their infrastructures, and especially about the management and governance challenges that this raises.
Now, let's come back to our original framework which we had already presented in the previous MOOC,
So, we have the urban infrastructures that have particular performances which we divided into questions of efficiency, sustainability, and resilience.
These infrastructures are governed and managed and we saw in the beginning of this block how this has to be seen as a sociotechnical system mutually influencing each other.
The performance of these infrastructures has an implication on the quality of life that citizens experience and of the competitiveness of a city that is particularly relevant for the businesses.
And both together, citizens and businesses, again determine the type of governance and management of urban infrastructures.
Now, there are a series of challenges that cities have to face.
Typically, those are economic challenges, financial challenges, social challenges, metropolitan challenges resulting from the fact that the metropolitan area is much bigger, generally, than the political entity and there are a lot of political challenges.
And finally, there are technological challenges as all the technologies in the infrastructures are currently evolving.
What we are concerned with in this MOOC is the particular effect of digitalization, and as we said, the effect is pervasive.
That is, it effects the infrastructure, as well as the management and their governance.
Now, different people use the word
"Smart City" for different things.
And this slide is here to clarify what we actually mean by "Smart City".
So, there are people who focus mainly on the economic dimension of "smart cities", and they are talking about a digital economy.
That is, they are basically concerned about how a city can create jobs, revitalize its economy, stimulate its economy, thanks to the information and communication technologies.
Typically, these people talk about innovation parks, about partnerships between universities and industry and see the city, the "smart city", as they say, as a place where the digital economy can be stimulated.
Then, there are people who look in particular at the social dimensions of digitalization, and they see in digitalization the potential to stimulate community life by way of online communities, by way of social interactions, by sort of stimulating, revitalizing the social and the cultural life in a city.
For them, that's what the "smart city" is about.
There are also people who talk about this sharing economy and this sharing economy, I think, has to be linked, between the digital economy and the online community.
So it's a combination of both.
And again, it is clear that digitalization stimulates such sharing economy.
Finally, there are people who talk about the whole political dimension.
They see in digitalization the potential to stimulate citizen participation, civil society or stakeholder involvement thanks to concepts like e-government, e-governance, e-participation, and for them, this is what the "smart city" is.
For us, the "smart city" pertains mainly to the technological dimension, that is to the infrastructures, and this is also, I think, one of the more generally accepted definitions of "smart city".
So, to summarize, for us,
"smart city" is mainly focused on the technological dimension, on the infrastructures, and we are not really concerned with, in this MOOC, about the digital economy, the online communities, and the e-participation.
So we have a more narrow definition of what the "smart city" is.
Let us illustrate that by a few showcases.
Again, those are things that people typically invoke when they talk about "smart city" from an infrastructure, from a technological dimension.
So things that we will see later on, for example, on transport, smart cards, online information mobility as a service, on the energy level, we talk about smart metering, smart lighting, things like this.
On the water level, we talk about digital metering and all kinds of things like this.
Then there is a typical group of people who talk about smart housing, intelligent buildings, energy savings, thanks to that, and the list is more or less endless.
One can look at other things, smart waste, smart green infrastructures,
There are many other things that can be added.
Those are all examples on the digital city
 infrastructure dimension.
So all these showcases, or examples of "smart city", have to be put in to the broader picture.
And the broader picture is the implications that digitalization has on urban systems.
There are four main implications.
The first implication is on the management and governance of the infrastructures themselves.
The combination, for example, between the legacy infrastructures and the opportunities that the digitalization offers and this is a clear management and governance challenge.
The infrastructures lead to services on the basis of these infrastructures.
You have services, and thanks to digitalization, there are plenty of new types of services, new opportunities of services, and that leads to other implications on managing and governing this services layer.
What is really new for the city will be the implications on the management and the governance of this digital or data layer?
This traditionally has not been the case, and the cities will have to think hard about the implications of managing this data layer.
And, of course, all together, we have an urban sociotechnical system as we have seen and the fact that digitalization somehow disrupts the way this urban system works leads to big implications in terms of governing this system, especially the institutions the rules about how this system works.
In the next two blocks, we will talk about smart urban energy systems and smart urban transportation systems.
And after that, we will come back to all the elements that we have discussed here so far.
So stay tuned.
