We all know that cities are not efficient, think for example of congestion.
We also know that cities are not sustainable, think of all the energy wasted and we know that cities are not resilient.
Think for example of all the different natural hazards.
Now addressing these challenges becomes even more important because of rapid population growth and global warming, for example.
Infrastructures are the backbone of cities and they do play a crucial role in addressing these challenges.
Over the past few years, technology is capable in addressing at least some of these challenges that are rapidly spreading.
This is especially the case of the information and communication technologies currently being developed by universities, technology providers, technology start ups and many more.
Cameras, sensors and other data collecting devices are producing unprecedented amounts of data.
For example, data about movements of vehicles and mobility behavior or data about energy and water consumption by individuals and buildings.
From this data smart mobility, smart energy, smart buildings and many other smart infrastructures can emerge and ultimately,  this could lead to what is now called a Smart City but we know that technology alone is not going to solve the complex problems of cities and our Smart City MOOC is precisely about that that is how to make use of digitalization for addressing the big challenges to create
Smart Cities. 
More precisely our course is about the management and the governance of Smart Cities as well as of the transition towards Smart Cities. 
Our course will be structured into 5 blocks or 5 weeks along the following structure.
First there will be an introduction to the concept of Smart Cities then we will talk about example of
Smart Urban Energy Systems.
The 3rd week will be about the example of Smart Urban Mobility Systems and the last 2 weeks are about managing the transition towards Smart Cities.
In this MOOC, you will hear lectures from myself and colleagues.
In addition, we will have interviews with experts from industry.
My name is Matthias Finger and
I'm a professor of Management of Network Industries at Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale 
 de Lausanne, Switzerland.
It will be my pleasure to lead you through this course on Smart Cities.
This MOOC is one of the outcomes of IGLUS which is an action research project involving selected cities, international organizations and firms.
You may already have followed our previous course entitled
Management of Urban Infrastructure.
In this course, we still talk about
Managing Urban Infrastructures but now we have a special focus on the information and communication technologies and these technologies totally change the way these infrastructures are managed and governed.
This is what we call Smart Cities.
Come and explore this new reality and join us in this course.
