Okay.
So, in the last lecture we...
..explored a little bit what simulation neuroscience is, what the rationale for it is and what the principles on which it is based are.
Now we are going to look a little bit about how we…, still part of this introduction, how do we...
..look, approach data, what are the data strategies and informatics and so on.
So in the case of, you know...
..going just up to building circuits of the brain, the first approach is, establish a data hierarchy and there is a reason that we actually approach simulation neuroscience at the micro circuit level.
It is because it kind of is in the middle between...
..brain regions and the whole brain and cells and molecules and so you actually capture how do you integrate the components below.
Later you can integrate these components into higher level components.
So, it is relatively simple rules for how do you approach data.
You establish a data hierarchy.
And in this case, it is also relatively simple.
You start with your ion channels which are membrane proteins that allow specific ions to flow through and in either directions or whichever directions, and as they flow through, they change the voltage of the...
..membrane of the neuron and collectively they will shape the way that the neuron behaves and we are going to learn a lot more about that as we go further.
The way we do that and we are going to also go further into that in the next series of lectures as we do ion channel screening, biophysical screening, one has to actually explore the biophysics of these channels and then one has to look at neurons and how we study neurons, how do we record from neurons and stay in neurons and how do we determine how they behave and then their synapses, how do we get to record how a synapse behaves.
So these are paired recordings and staining the two neurons, so you can see how neurons connect with each other and then there are also circuits and how do you study circuits.
You can stain them globally, you can do antibody staining, you can do stain for the expression of the genes, it is called in situ hybridization, or you can actually suck out some of the cytoplasm from inside a cell and you can find out which genes are expressed.
You can also look at the emergent activities that emerge in the circuit electrically and voltage sensitive.
So there are many techniques and approaches to record from the sort of levels, ion channels, neurons, synapses, circuits and then...
..in order to do the reconstruction, you have to...
...and build algorithms, you have to pay attention to the way you analyze the data.
So you have to analyze in the case of ion channels, you have to analyze the kinetics of the channels, open and closed.
Distribution - where are they located? In the cell body or up in the branches?
What are the combinations of ion channels?
That is you can't just have one type of ion channel, you need lots of different types of ion channels if you want to get interesting behavior.
So, what are the combinations that are possible?
And then how many of each type do you have?
What is the conductance, how much current does ion channel pass through?
So, this allows you to build a model of the ion channel and we are going to learn how we do that in other lectures later.
And then you study neurons and we use patch-clamp and I will show you in subsequent lectures how we do that and that allows you to get the morphology, so you can get the branching,
3-D branching structure of a neuron to the morphology.
You can also record from these, so you can actually find out how they behave electrically.
You can stain them, so you can find out what proteins are located on to them
And you can also suck out some of this juice from the cytoplasm, from inside a cell and then you can find out what genes are switched on in the cell, so you can find out genes.
So it gives you a very in-depth view of a single neuron in terms of its structure, its function, its genes, its proteins and so on.
And synapses are of course more tricky.
They are small, they are half a micron.
Basically, a little bit bigger than a bacteria, about the size of a bacteria for many of them.
They are the most complex little devices, biological devices in the universe, but how do we record from them, so you have to record from two cells and then you have to stain both cells, so you can find a way for the axon to go out to touch the other cell and how did they form synapses.
So you want to measure and the numbers you need are like synapses per connection, you need to stimulate and see how much voltage is produced on the other side by the receiving neurons, you get the synaptic strength and then you have to play with the synaptic transmission to try to understand what kind of dynamics, what is the communication code between two neurons.
Synaptic dynamics and then you can ask,
"how does the synapse, how can it be controlled if you throw a drug on it or if you throw a chemical on it like a neuromodulator,
(INAUDIBLE) or adrenaline, dopamine, histamine".
How does that actually change the behavior of the synapse.
So these are all numbers that you can get and they are being obtained in many different ways, in many different labs around the world and then you have circuits and from the circuits you want to know essentially, how many neurons they are, how many types of neurons they are, how are they arranged together, how are they positioned, are they clustered together and so on.
All kinds of geometrical rules of how do you organize your neurons in a piece of tissue.
Then there is, of course also, electrophysiological data which tells you how that circuit behaves and many experiments around how little pieces of brain tissue or circuits behave.
So this is, you know, to summarize the issue, identify a hierarchy.
In this case it is ion channels.
They go into the neurons, the synapses connect the neurons and you put the neurons together in a circuit.
So these are the components.
When you build your ion channels you freeze, you build your neurons, you freeze, you build your synapses, you freeze, you put them into the circuit and test.
