Let's look at the informatics strategies that we use or the principles of informatics.
And as I said earlier neuroinformatics is probably one of the most challenging informatics sciences there are because of the data heterogeneity, the complexity, the lack of standardization, the uncertainty, different formats, there are many many problems in trying to database the brain.
What is very important when you look at neuroscience data from a simulation neuroscience perspective is that, and you will learn this more and more as we go further, is that all data is good.
There is actually no such thing as bad data.
There is wrong data, there is a lot of wrong data,
In fact, most of the data is wrong.
But all data is good for reconstruction.
Even bad data, even wrong data that says: "Look, you know, this is just a wrong experiment".
When you have wrong data, it actually helps you understand better what is a right data.
So, what we try to do is to build an infrastructure and Sean here is going to give you a series of lectures on this, we build an infrastructure that allows us to compare experimental data with simulation data.
Because that is how we test and validate the reconstructions.
So, you have experiments and your simulations and we try to make them as equivalent as possible.
And then we want to informatically map them in a way that we can also compare them as well, as much as possible.
So you want to easily be able to compare experimental data with simulation data.
You need access to all the data, all the papers that is out there.
There are around 10 million papers that are relevant to understanding the brain, not all directly on the brain but are relevant to understanding the brain.
In some form you want to get all those papers, you want to mine them for little nuggets of knowledge that may be used, that you could use on the experiment side so that at some point you can use them to validate your reconstruction.
So, you want to find all the papers and associated data.
The open access and open data policies are extremely important if we want to be able to move towards simulating the brain, simulating the heart, liver, or any part of the body or simulating diseases.
It is essential that data and papers are open.
You want to organize them, so you have got to create knowledge graphs knowledge spaces, so that you can mine and analyze this data easily and ultimately, you actually want to map them onto an atlas.
So that you can navigate in the kind of coordinate space that the brain is.
You want to navigate through to different part of the brain and you want to say: "What do
I know about it?
What are all the papers, what is all the data?"
And then I can see experimental data and I can see simulation data.
And I can compare.
And I can see how close is the simulation data getting to the real data.
So, this is the general approach to informatics or neuroinformatics that we use.
And again, the principle is: get all the data.
Wrong data actually helps in some ways to be able to find out and understand what is right data.
And I will give you many examples of this as we go on in the next lectures.
