We briefly looked at how you study single neurons, we looked at how you obtain the morphology, how you could analyze the morphology, there is a lot more that you can read up on morphometrics, there is open source software that we have released that you can use to analyze the morphologies.
And we looked at how you record from cells, obtain electrophysiological properties, and how you characterize them, and how you can use that to identify different behaviors.
There is a lot in the literature and a lot of publications on how you classify based on these properties.
It is not all clear sometimes, that it is a clear class, but there are approaches to be able to objectively classify, semi-objectively classify, and sometimes very subjectively classify cells.
It is a big area of research to decide what really are classes, but in many cases, you have to look at multiple lines of evidence in order to decide what a class is, or whether there is a class.
Lastly, let's look at just some caveats, and here that main caveat, of course, is that you have to get such high resolution data, you need to record from brain tissue, and brain tissue means you have got to cut the tissue, and that means that you have cut neurons and you have to find a way to repair these cut parts.
With patch clamp, of course, which gives you the highest resolution view of the morphology and the electrical properties and molecular properties of a single neuron but you can only record from a few neurons.
That is one limitation of it.
So this really gives you high-quality spa state.
And then, you have to classify.
There is a whole field of science based on the classification of different morphologies and electrical types, to decide what they are.
In summary, we learned about brain slices, that that is where the source of a lot of very detailed, high-resolution data comes from.
We learned a little bit about patch-clamp, but, again, I encourage you to go and read up about the electronics, and the biophysics, and the electrophysiological principles behind it.
We learned how to obtain morphologies.
And we learned how to obtain electrical properties.
