Okay, so how do we profile the morphologies?
Well, when you do this many times you of course see a vast number of cell types and here every cell type is colored a different color and there are many different morphologies different ways that the dendrites are branching different ways the axons are branching and so, you need a lot of examples of each of these cells and here is sort of a catalog, a sort of a periodic table of the main morphological cell types that are in the neo-cortex.
These are interneurons, the inhibitory interneurons and these are excitatory, typically pyramidal cells but there are also other types of cells that are not strictly pyramidal cells, but excitatory cells.
You can see they have many different branching features they have names,
Martinotti cells
Bi-tufted cells,
Double-bouquet cell
Bipolar cell, and so on, and these names actually come from about a hundred years of anatomical study starting with Ramon y Cajal, a very famous Spanish anatomist who actually drew lots of cells.
Under a normal microscope he would actually look under the microscope and then he would just draw them.
Today we can trace them in 3D but he named many of these cells and many of the famous anatomists that followed named many of these cells.
Once you have the morphology, you can analyze this morphology and we have released an open source tool called Neuro-M which you can actually just run and analyse these and you can get lots of parameters about the cell how big the cell body is, how big the arbor is how frequently they branch, what the angle of branching is and so on, and then these features you can use either to try to classify cells to see which class a cell fits into but you can also use them in other ways to build new cells, and I will show you that in the moment.
So, the important thing here is that the classification is based on local morphology so it is just on the way that this cell looks.
This of course is not everything about a cell.
Cells may project to further places but it is typically the excitatory cells, they project to different brain regions they project... whether it is across the hemisphere or to deeper brain regions or even just laterally to different parts of the neo cortex, but we just look at the local morphology and the name is based on the local morphology.
Now one of the caveats in getting morphologies in slices, brain slices, you saw the slice before, is that you actually shave off in the slice because this is the slice, that is the thickness of the slice, so, you shave off a part of the neuron, the branches of a neuron.
So after you have done that, you have to kind of repair the missing part and there is software called Neurorepair which identifies where these cut points are and then it grows these extended parts to be consistent with the statistics of the other side. and then it grows these extended parts to be consistent with the statistics of the other side.
This is how we repair the morphologies.
Sometimes we also use data from in vivo recordings to learn how to do this repairing process better, so in vivo validation.
One needs a certain number of cells to be able to clone them and make a bigger data set and here what you are seeing is the averages.
The average is many cells overlayered on top of each other and you see a sort of an average hexagonal structure.
This helps us obtain the statistics that you need to, A repair the cells. Also, you can now computationally clone these cells you can make many copies of them within the statistical variations.
They are not exact copies, they are statistical copies so even in this case of the neo-cortical micro circuit we have about a thousand cells, but we have enough initial statistics, past data statistics, to actually build hundreds of thousands or millions of copies of each of these different cell types so we can produce many, many copies.
That is one approach and a more recent approach that we are using, and we won't go into that in this MOOC, is where we actually computationally synthesized them using the rules of how they branch.
The idea here is that you want to learn how to synthesize any cell type in the brain, and that is a long term goal.
