Okay.
In the last lectures, we learned a little bit about what is simulation neuroscience, the rationale behind it, some of the principles on which it is based and some of the caveats to keep in mind.
And in this lecture, we are going to look at how we study single neurons, how we profile the morphologies and how we profile the electrophysiological properties of the neurons.
So, this is an example of an experimental lab that tries to reverse-engineer or experimentally study the micro-circuitry, individual neurons, synaptic connections and how the micro circuit is put together.
So there are a number of components here.
You have what is called...
..an infrared differential interference contrast microscope.
It is basically a clever trick you can look it up on the internet.
It is a clever trick to get very high depth view into the tissue.
So, it just cleans up some of the optical noise, but it is a beautiful technique that was developed by Hans-Ulrich Dodt and really pioneered in Bert Sakmann's lab in Heidelberg.
We were all postdocs there at the time and we started doing a lot of experiments using this kind of microscope, because it gave us an unprecedented access and view into the neural tissue.
There are these manipulators that will bring electrodes down into the tissue that is under the microscope.
It is all controlled by pads and in fact, we even have a setup which we call fly patching, because it is all done as a sort of remote cockpit that controls all of these electrodes.
You have amplifiers that amplify the electrical signal and you have a number of... you can put imaging techniques as well.
These are controlling the manipulators, but you can also have imaging techniques, so you can look at fluorescence or any other kinds of images.
It is just another example of lots of pipettes, the sort of record is 12, you can only record
12 neurons at a time.
It is very few when you think about the whole brain, but you get very high resolution recordings.
This is a movie that basically just gives you a little bit more of a perspective of...
..what the setup looks like and here is a movie that shows you what patch-clamping is.
This is a glass pipette.
The tip is about a micron in diameter or a little bit bigger and it approaches this neuron and you can see, it is patching the cell.
Now what that means is that if you have a cell, you come in with a pipette and you come closer, you actually blow... you put pressure at the back, so it blows solution out from the tip and it cleans the membrane, so you can actually get the glass patching onto the cell and the secret of patch-clamp which was discovered by...
..Hamill and Bert Sakmann and Erwin Neher, and they won the Nobel prize for this, is that it forms a gigaseal here, so very high resistance.
It is very high resistance between here, so the current will not leak out of here and it means that you can break this membrane and what you end up with is...
..your electrical recording here that you can then measure the voltage inside and as you should know, these are basic things you should know, inside is negative compared to the outside, so this is typically about minus 60 millivolts and then you can see fluctuations in this voltage.
So this is called whole-cell patch-clamp.
Whole-cell patch-clamp, and there are of course other configurations that you can also do to get a piece of the membrane and so on, but I won't go into that.
So this is whole-cell patch-clamp and it gives us access to a single neuron and with this access you can inject a dye into it and here is a movie just showing you what that cell looks like after we have injected a dye into that cell and stained it like developing a photograph and then you get a full picture of...
..what that morphology of that neuron looks like.
You can also inject fluorescent dyes into it.
You can inject calcium sensitive dyes, you can do lots of different things, injecting all kinds of chemicals and experimental agents into cells and then you can see them.
You can of course also record from the dendrites, you can record from the cell body, you can record from the axon and there are many studies that you can look up about this, because a lot of these studies are used in the reconstruction.
And that allows you to really get a very high resolution view of nudges, the morphology, but also the electrical behavior of a neuron at the cell body in the dendrites or in the axon.
These are axons going down.
The sort of repertoire that you can play out here as you obtain a whole-cell, this is a whole-cell patch clamp here, the pipette is coming in here too.
It has broken the membrane.
You have a gigaseal, so you can record from the cell and this is what an electrical behavior will give a pulse, if you give it a step current pulse into the cell and the cell will react by producing action potentials.
It is producing one and then a burst of action potentials.
It stops and then there is another burst of action potentials and this, I will show you how we profile this, so that you can... you do a lot of testing to find out how does the neuron react to electrical current that comes in.
You can also suck out some of the... we call it cytoplasm harvesting where you take out some of the juice, the cytoplasm from inside the cell and you do... you isolate the RNA, the messenger RNA.
You can convert that to cDNA in a process called reverse transcription and then you get cDNA and then you can fish.
You put in little probes with sequences of specific genes and you can fish out different genes.
You can ask yourself
"I want to find out, if gene X, this purple one, is inside the cell".
You make a specific gene sequence and you send in this probe and it tells you whether this purple gene is inside this cell using a process we call multiplex PCR and today there are many more approaches to find out which genes are expressed inside a cell.
You can load the cell with a dye as I said before and then under a microscope, you can reconstruct it and here in red you see the... in red you see the dendrites going in different places.
You draw this in three dimensions under a 3-D microscope with an XYZ stage.
So, you are actually tracing it in 3D and then you can also trace the axon and that gives you the axonal hover of the neuron.
You have to do this for many cells.
They take a long time.
It takes a week or so or a few days at least to draw, trace one cell in 3D, so you have got a digital model of the cell and in our case, you know, we have about a thousand of these cells reconstructed which is not, as I said in the first stage, it is still sparse data, but that took 20 years to obtain, so you have to find other ways to build up your data set.
This is just an example where you can see the genes, the bands.
There are techniques that you can use to see which genes...
These are ion channel genes.
Names of different ion channel genes and it tells you whether these ion channels are the gene that they must switched on inside the cell.
So this gives you a genetic profile or a molecular profile.
This is an ion channel profile.
You can also look at calcium binding proteins or neuro peptides so that you can actually identify the molecular profile of the cell.
So, this is what you can do all in a single cell.
You basically get its electrical profile, morphological profile and a molecular profile.
