Let's look now at the electrophysiological profiling, how do we profile the electrical behavior of neurons.
So, as I said, you obtain these wholesale recordings from cells.
So you find out, you stimulate a positive current into this, so you get a step pulse here.
And then you see how the cell reacts, in this case, it's producing a burst, it stops, and then fires more spikes.
Here you do a high resolution, it is a short time frame, so you can actually look at when does the action potential start, you can get the amplitude, you can see how fast it is rising, you can see how fast it is falling, you can see how deep it goes after, because some can go... afterhyperpolarization, can be very big, some shallow.
You can give it a ramp pulse to find out what is the threshold, what is the threshold of the action potential, when does the cell start generating action potentials, and then you can give a range of different current pulses to see how the cell will react to different current pulses.
You can try to give a series of strong pulses to see whether the action potential will change, in some cells, the action potential drops and gets very small, in other cases they don't.
So the amplitude can change, and those old properties...
You can give short pulses and look what happens afterwards.
And you can see here, that the cell hyperpolarizes and it recovers slowly after that.
So this is an afterhyperpolarization potential.
You can give it a negative pulse inward, and then hyperpolarize the membrane very fast and then it relaxes back.
And you will see in
Idan Segev's course that this can be used to calculate a lot of properties about the membrane.
Then you can also give different pulses below thresholds, sub-thresholds.
And you can calculate the input, the IV curve, the current-voltage relationship of a cell.
So the idea is you do a whole battery of stimuli, to actually probe a neuron and see how it reacts.
It is a bit like a psychologist for neurons.
And then you classify the electrical behavior.
So, when you do that, what we have found is that there are essentially eleven types of behaviors.
You have cells that are slow-firing cells, for example, here or here.
You have very fast-firing cells, they can go at high speed, these are fast-spikers or non-accommodating, classical non-accommodating cells.
You have cells that, when you excite them, they say: "wait a minute", and there is a delay, and then they start spiking.
And you have the opposite, where the cell starts with a burst so it starts actually with a very high frequency burst, and then it slows down.
So you have all these different ways that a cell can behave, some stutter, we call them
"stuttering cells", like here, that is almost like a morse code.
Stuttering cells.
Others are even called
"irregular spiking", it means you can't actually predict when the cell is going to fire.
You stimulate it and then in some other process they just fire whenever they seem to want to fire, it is not as predictable as any of these other approaches.
One thing that we found is that for every morphology, you can have multiple different ways that they can behave.
So you can get a certain morphological type of cell, and you can discover that same type of cell can behave in different ways.
So either a fast-spiking cell, this is a burst irregular-spiking cell...
So we call these morpho-electrical types.
And so, in combination, you can try and map the morphology with,
"for this given morphology, which electrical types do you find?"
And you can create a map between different morphologies, these are morphologies and the different electrical behaviors.
And what that gives you is, in the case here, where you have fifty-five morphologies, and you have eleven electrical types.
In combination, it gives you
207 morpho-electrical types.
So these are the individual characters, if you wish, of the circuit.
