We looked at studying single neurons.
Two different ways that we can explore neurons in terms of the morphology and electro-physiological properties
And today we are going to look at ion channels, profiling, molecular profiling, what do we mean by neuron types and how do we actually obtain neuron densities and then some caveats in a summary.
So ion channels, they are the heart of neurons if you wish or heart of the electrical activity of neurons and it is quite a challenge when you first go in and look at all the ion channels, but the organization is actually quite elegant.
There are a lot of ion channel related genes, but many of these associated proteins that will regulate ion channels or that make ion channels work.
There are about 280 well characterized ion channels and of them, 145 are voltage-gated which means that when the voltage changes, they either open or close.
Now, the way to sort of make it easy to digest is first of all, everybody should know that ion channels, they are special transmembrane proteins that allow, selectively allow ions to flow through.
You can have an ion channel that selectively allows sodium to flow through for example or specifically calcium or you could have typically potassium and what you should all remember and you should look this up is that the potassium of course, is very high on the inside of cells, sodium is very high on the outside of cells.
Okay.
Calcium is very low.
60 nanomolar or so on the inside of cells and calcium is actually relatively very high outside of cells in the order of 1 to 2 millimolar.
Calcium is in the range of 60 nanomolar.
There are pumps in that and we are not going to be considering these at this point in time.
It is not... something you can get into later.
So when you look at the potassium channels or just the channels in general, you have the sodium channels, that is over here.
They are the ones that essentially, help you to get action potential, spikes.
You have the calcium channels which also get activated.
For example in the heart, most of the action potential starts off as a sodium channel and you have a long calcium action potential and in neurons, the sodium spikes help activate calcium channels which brings calcium into the cell and that drives a number of other biochemical processes.
So this is how you get your excitation.
It is with your sodium and calcium channels and then you have your resting membrane potential.
Most cells as you should know inside is between
6 to minus 60 to minus 80 millivolts inside the cell and the way you maintain that is by keeping a lot of...
..potassium inside, but essentially, it is about the permeability.
If a membrane that is only permeable to potassium channels, then you will go to what is called the potassium Nernst potential which you are going to learn about later on.
And that keeps the cell at this potential.
So you have to have sort of leak channels or channels that are just permeable, they are not...
...necessarily very sensitive to voltage, they just stay open all the time and they actually help keep the resting potential.
So that is these.
These K2... and the inward rectifiers.
By convention when current flows out, positive current flows out, it is called an outward current and when positive current flows in, it is called an inward current.
Okay.
So the resting membrane potential as I said here is controlled by these channels.
The depolarization is controlled by these channels and then you have hyperpolarization.
What stops the excitation and brings it back down again, it is this class of channels, the voltage activated...
...potassium channels and you also have the calcium-activated potassium channels.
So these are very important to bring the membrane potential back down again, to stop the firing and to allow another spike to occur.
So if we focus a little bit on the voltage activated potassium channels, because they are really the extremely important in controlling excitation.
You block them, you get seizures, everything goes wrong.
There are 40 genes, only 40 genes in mammalian tissue and many of them are also similar in plants and others.
In 12 classes, they are called Kv 1-12 and each gene produces a specific subunit here and you have to combine four of them together to form a channel.
If you combine, if it is one gene that produces all four subunits, the same subunit, then you have what is called a homomeric channel.
But you can have two genes, each producing two subunits and when they combine, you have what is called...
..a heteromeric channel.
Homomeric for the same, heteromeric for different subunits, when different subunits combine.
If it was only homomeric channels that could be produced, you would have 40 channels, of types of potassium channels, but because there are different combinations they can combine, different subunits can combine differently, the result is that there is well over 40 different voltage activated potassium channels.
This is very important, because depending on which one you use, you are going to have a different electrical property in neurons as I will show you later.
So these are the family of... the Kv family, what we call the Kv family.
How do we characterize how these ion channels behave?
One way is to isolate the messenger RNA.
To isolate messenger RNA from the brain, so you basically squash up, homogenize the tissue, you isolate the messenger RNA, you do PCR amplification, you get your cDNA, you clone the gene and put it into a vector and you inject that into cell lines.
So you produce cell lines.
Cell lines like a Chinese hamster.
Ovary cell lines or hex cell lines or different cell lines that you can use and then you can inject the ion channel gene into these cells and then they express, they express the channel on the membrane and you can induce the expression with tetracycline or other kinds of chemicals when you're ready to study the channel.
And in the past it was that you needed to use patch-clamp.
Patch-clamp, so you come in with a patch pipette.
A very high resistance patch pipette here as I mentioned yesterday.
A high gigaseal. Then you can actually see this channel opening and closing.
Opening and closing.
But today we do this in an industrial way.
There are robots and basically, the robot just puts the pipettes in and patches automatically and so you can do this at a very high throughput way.
Now what you do when you have your channel and you can study how it is opening and closing, you stimulate the channel.
Here you can see that you give different pulses of different amplitudes and you study activation.
How does the channel open when the voltage changes and you study in activation which is how does the channel close once it has been activated.
So the voltage is active, but the channel just starts closing.
Even if the voltage is high, the channel starts closing.
So you can see here the channel starts closing.
And then you have deactivation.
Deactivation is, after it has been activated, how long does it recover from this activation.
And then there are other dynamic variables and different ways that you can study the channel, but the most important is activation, inactivation, deactivation.
So when you do that on the 40 ion channel genes, there are many that are silent, because homomeric subunits, when they combine, they are not going to produce any current.
For example here, you are getting silent channels.
These are silent channels.
But there are many that activate and the first thing you can see is that they have different kinds of activation.
Many different kinds of activation.
This is Kv 10.2.
It has a slow activation.
This is Kv 1.4, very fast activation and inactivation.
This one has almost no inactivation.
It just keeps being activated.
So opening, you can think of it like this that opening during a voltage change, you can either be fast activating or slow activating.
Closing while the voltage is on, you can have fast inactivating or slow inactivating and then how does it recover after or close after activation.
Fast deactivating, slow deactivating.
So you can see now if you combine, the combinatorics of combining this can give you a rich, a very rich diversity of ion channel kinetics.
Now, this rich diversity of kinetics is very powerful, because if you combine them in different ways, you can produce neurons with many different electrical behaviors and properties.
Now unfortunately, at this stage, there isn't a comprehensive data set of every channel kinetic which we can introduce into a cell and we are building this and it will be completed in the next few years.
In the meantime, what we do is we look at classes with build models of classes of channels and we just call them transient channels or persistent channels of calcium-activated and these are basically engineered.
So they are engineered channels.
They are not genetically determined channels.
They are theoretical channels in a way, but we are replacing these channels and then you have a neuron that is very accurate.
What is important in relationship with what I told you about yesterday or in the previous lectures is that, you can do this and then still fit the electrical behavior of the neuron, but what you won't be able to do is tell what is the significance of the ion channels.
The only purpose, the ion channel serves is to give you neurons that behave the way that they behave in the brain and then you can use those neurons in circuits and you can tell what neurons are doing in circuits, but not what the ion channels are doing.
So that is what limits your interpretation of your...
...simulation results.
Here is Channelpedia.
You can go there.
There is a big database of all the channels, giving you literature, telling you about the channels as well as the models and there are Hodgkin-Huxley models and Markov models that you can download.
You are going to learn how to do this in later courses.
How to build the Hodgkin-Huxley model.
So the beauty of having many different types of ion channels is that it depends on how you mix them.
You can create voltage shapes.
All kinds of voltage shapes.
You can create bursting behavior and you can shape the way the neuron is going to behave and here is just an idea showing you that, you know, depending on what kind of sodium channel you have, it will determine how fast the voltage rises.
It will determine whether the action potential gets smaller with each successive one or stays the same with each successive one and depending on the voltage activated potassium channels, it will decide on many things.
How fast you return, how deep the return is, what is called the afterhyperpolarization potential and whether a new spike can occur or not occur.
So all these channels, they really serve to control many features of the way the voltage is going to change.
