Next, let's look at the molecular profile.
We will come back to the ion channel profiling and see how that relates to the way that the neurons are constructed.
Let's briefly look first deeper into the molecular profile.
So here for example, we started off, you remember we said how do we study neurons.
We can do whole-cell patch-clamp, we get the electrical properties, we get the cytoplasm and we can determine which genes are expressed and we stay in the cell and we can get the morphology.
Now what you can do is, and we can characterize the electrical properties.
So you can say electrical property one, two, three, four, five and you can make a huge list of seventy or hundred electrical features such as, the speed of the action potential, upswing and downswing and amplitude and so on and then you can also take these molecular profiles which genes are switched on inside the cell and you can create
Gene 1, Gene 2, Gene 3.
And when you have that, you can start trying to compare and ask yourself:
"If I look just at the genes, how does it relate to what kind of electrical behavior it is?"
So here you see an example in this blue cell.
These are the genes that are sort of negatively correlated, which means that it is highly unlikely to find these genes, it is highly unlikely to find these genes in the blue cell, but it is highly likely that you will find these genes in the blue cell and here it is the opposite.
So these two neurons, the one has a delay, the other one has a fast start, they are both fast spiking cells, but they essentially have almost an inverted gene expression profile.
So they are using almost exactly the opposite set of ion channels to produce their electrical behavior.
And this is one of the information sets we use when we try and classify neurons.
So we don't only look at their electrical properties, we also have looked deeply into what genes are expressed in them and that gives us confidence that we have two different classes.
As you can see in this case, it is a very clear separation of two electrical types of cells.
So what you can do is you can take this and this is a very simple linear operator where you take your electrical properties going from E1 to E61 and your genetic or ion channels,
Kv 1-1 all the way down to even calcium binding proteins and other kinds of proteins that are in the cell.
And you can ask how does each value correlates with each gene.
And there are a lot of statistic you can do to see if it is statistically significant and establish an operator like this which gives you the measure of the correlation between these different parameters and as I said this is a very simple linear operator.
You can build much more sophisticated nonlinear operators and multi dependency operators and so on, but just this linear operator is already very powerful, because here you can see that you can actually predict, you can look at the genes that are switched on and you can apply the linear operator and you can calculate with a very small error, the size of an action potential, the width of an action potential, the fast down swing of the voltage and so on.
And the reason why this is extremely exciting and important is it means that ultimately, we won't have to record from every neuron in the brain in order to work out how it will behave.
We can get the gene expression.
So this is why one of the big goals of working the Blue Brain Project is to work with many labs around the world to try to obtain the single cell gene expression profiles.
So if you go for example to the human brain or to a nonhuman primate brain or to any other species, you don't necessarily have to restart everything.
You have to do some experiments to see that this holds for example, also in another species, but then you can actually try and get as much genetic information as possible and then you can predict the electrical properties.
So that is an example again of how you constantly look for ways to rely on less and less data.
If we had to rely on recording from every single type of cell in the brain in order to find out what electrical properties they had, it is going to take us a very, very long time to understand the brain.
This is a way around it.
It is not yet perfect, but it is the beginning of...
...a step in that direction.
So in general, you can see that what determines, what determines the electrical properties of a neuron is essentially the kinetics of each channel.
It depends on which combination-- if you combine this one, this one, this one and this one, you are going to get a certain behavior and if you combine this one and this one and this one and this one, you get a different behavior.
So it depends on this combination and it depends on the specific kinetics and then it also depends on the location.
Where is this channel located?
Some channels are located only close to the cell body, other channels are located much more out in the dendrites.
Other channels are located more in the axon and so if you know what the kinetics are, the combination of kinetics and you know where they are, you are very close to doing very little to simulate a single neuron.
You are missing the densities.
You are missing how many of these channels do you need to put in in each compartment.
And that is something that you are going to learn about and actually run an exercise using BluePyOpt to adjust the densities in order to reproduce electrical behavior in a neuron.
So here is just an example again.
The goal here is to get to densities and in this movie you can... it is just trying to illustrate how distributing channels differentially on dendrites can also give you many of these different electrical properties.
The molecular diversity can be mapped, so you have your morphologies over here and you can also map them to the electrical properties, so you can produce this kind of map, which tells you how many combinations you can have which we also spoke about previously, but what is exciting about this is that you can continue this map.
You can say:
"I have this kind of morphology, it expresses this these proteins" and in this case, it is expressing two different kinds of proteins and it will have one, two, three, four, five different electrical behaviors.
So you have this cell expressing these two proteins and it has five different electrical behaviors and you can build a map like that for each of these cells, in terms of what is the probability that they are going to express these different proteins.
These are calcium binding proteins.
They bind calcium and buffer calcium and these are neuro peptides and they exert other modulatory effects on how the neuron functions.
It is not critically important to remember them.
It is just that you have many, many proteins and peptides.
And we choose these, because they tend to be characteristic of some types of cells.
So with this map, it is possible now to actually go and stain your model neuron, because you can calculate the probabilities that they are going to have these proteins, so you can stain them.
You add these proteins probabilistically into these kinds of neurons for example.
And that way you can stain all your neurons, in silico neurons, and then you can of course compare them to what is seen in vitro, in the real tissue.
So with that, we can now have a look at... you have a basic idea of the morphology profiling, electrophysiology profile, ion channel profiling, how we do that, molecular profiling in terms of other types of proteins such as calcium binding proteins and neuro peptides.
And now let's briefly look at neuron types and there is...
It is quite a huge field.
Debatable.
There is no clear consensus about how to name a neuron, how to classify a neuron, but there are some important guidelines and the guidelines that we use when naming a neuron is a bit like in chemistry.
You start off by...
...identifying the location of the neuron in the brain.
It may be in the visual cortex, in the layer two, so you would call it the visual cortex layer two cell.
And then you identify the local morphology.
So it may be in the visual cortex layer two,
Martinotti cell.
And then you identify what subclass of electrical behavior it has, so it would be visual cortex, layer two, Martinotti cell, delayed accommodation.
And then you would identify what molecular profile it has, such as expressing somatostatin and then you would go further and indicate as many genes as you can find within that cell that may characterize that type of cell and then ultimately it may be that two neurons that are almost identical, they will not be genetically perfectly identical, but they may be very similar, they could actually project to different brain regions and you could classify these according to the projection type.
So the way that we look at neuron classification and naming is that we should think about the dimensions in very separate ways and combine them in a systematic way starting with location to morphology to electrical properties, molecular, genetic and then projection, projection subclasses.
