In this lecture we are going to focus on synaptic dynamics.
In the previous one, we touched briefly on the quantal size of the kinetics, of the strengths of the synapse the amplitude of the synapse, and now we are going to focus on the dynamics of transmission in particular.
So, when you record from four neurons, 1, 2, 3, 4 it is not that they are all connected to each other.
You will find that
10% are connected so there is a 10% chance that they are going to be connected to each other in this case it maybe that this one is connected to this one but remember with multiple synapses.
Now, what I showed you previously was that it was what was the response to a single action potential that you produce this EPSP.
EPSP as your action potential.
But if you give a train of action potentials so it is a high frequency train of action potentials you see that the amplitude starts dropping and if you then wait, you wait for 500ms and you give another action potential you see that it is recovered to some extent, it hasn't completely recovered, you would have to wait longer before it recovers to this level.
This is called synaptic depression.
Now, it is extremely important because every synapse has some synaptic depression.
So they are not linear synapses, there isn't any case in the neocortex at least where every spike has the same effect if it is given in a high frequency.
So this is synaptic depression, so you have the conductance which is the amplitude, how big is this response and that is only for the first action potential which you see here as well, and then if you give a train you see this drop, so we call this the weights and what most people know in neuroscience and most people use in neuroscience and when they build models of the brain and neural network models they have two neurons that are connected and they adjust the weights.
This is what they are talking about as what is the magnitude of the response when one neuron communicates with another neuron but it is not that simple and it is actually much more exciting that there is also an interesting dynamic in the transmission so it is almost as if the synapse gets tired of communicating you start communicating, it is a loud sound in the beginning and then it gets softer.
Now, it has interesting behavior interesting properties of synaptic depression is that if you start off with 10Hz, you see this kind of depression and then you go to
20Hz, 30Hz, 40Hz and it depresses faster.
If you plotted on a curve, you see that the synaptic amplitude drops significantly and these two curves are actually in high calcium and low calcium.
This is the low calcium case.
The reason why we drop calcium is because it lowers the probability of release so that the EPSP starts off smaller.
If the calcium is high it starts off bigger and depresses faster.
But what is interesting is that, at a certain frequency the amplitude drops inversely proportional to the frequency.
It is what we call one of F behavior and that is important because it means that beyond this frequency you can fire the presynaptic cell as fast as you want but the product of the amplitude and the frequency stays constant.
Which means you are screaming as loud as you want and the louder you scream the more the amplitude is adjusted so that you hear exactly the same thing, and you can see that here the steady state amplitude plateaus.
So that means that neurons have a limit in how they are communicating with this you can't just jack up the volume you can't just communicate faster and harder there is a dynamic, it is reacting to how you communicate and this is going to turn out to be extremely important shaping the dynamics of neural circuits and we believe they are fundamental to the emergence of higher level cognitive functions. 
Now, an interesting principal, there are a few principals we have learned from this and the first is that, when you... these are three cells here there are three cells here, one, two, three and one cell is communicating to both these cells so here is the action potential train from cell one that is communicating to the other three and in one cell you can see a strong response and in other cell you see a small response and that is probably just because it has less synapses so it is just connecting with maybe two or three or four synapses and here it is maybe connecting with five or six synapses but also because the probability of release here may be low and the probability of release here may be high.
The principal here is that even though they have different amplitudes they all show depression, and so the principal is, when these types of cells communicate with each other these are layer five parametal cells, they depress.
And this is going to be important as you are will see in the next few slides.
Now, what you also find is that if you have two of the same type of cell and they communicate with each other you see the depression, which is what you see here.
But, if it is also the same axon and it touches another type of cell suddenly you see an opposite type of behavior the synapse gets stronger and actually it even gets so stronger it starts firing this other cell.
So, this singe cell can start communicating and then it kind of warms up and it gets stronger until this cell reacts.
This is called synaptic facilitation. Okay.
Synaptic facilitation has another interesting dynamic in response to frequency.
So, when you increase the frequency here the amplitude first grows, and then it reaches a peak and then it starts depressing, and it starts depressing because this synapse also has depression it is just that it has a slower time constant for the depression.
So, first you see the facilitation, that you see here that makes the amplitude grow and then it drops and what is interesting is that depending on how much facilitation there is you can actually calculate when it is going to reach its peak frequency.
This is very important because that means that these synapses behave like bandpass filters.
At a certain frequency they are going to be the strongest.
If the frequency is lower they are going to be very weak and if it is much higher, they are going to be very weak as well.
So, there is a certain frequency that that they have got to fire in order to have a maximum effect on the other cell.
What this translates into is that if you have poisson type of firing which is what you have when you record from neurons in the brain actually it doesn't look like this, it needs structure it looks like there is noise, they are just firing and if you apply that kind of firing to a pre-synaptic cell and you look at the response you see wildly fluctuating amplitudes so you do not get a constant amplitude which is what most people today still even ten years after this discovery, most people still use in neural networks constant amplitude synapses with just the weight and not with the dynamics.
But this is how all synapses in the neocortex behave.
Now there are three classes there are the synapses that facilitate, they grow, and we classify them and you can actually distinguish them statistically you can cluster them and you can show that these are different classes these will occur between certain types of cells and not between other types of cells and then you have the depressing synapses and then you have what we call pseudo linear synapses, synapses that with a facilitation and depression are almost balanced so the synapse can fire at very high frequencies and they only show a mild depression.
Now what is interesting is that if you look at a single neuron now you have to consider that there are many different types of cells that are communicating with this cell and each of them can use a different type of synapse.
That means that this neuron is interpreting even exactly the same action potential train that may be coming even if they could inject the same action potential train from each of these cells this neuron would interpret this message differently from each neuron, for each neuron.
But it doesn't just stop there, it is because these synapses are also distributed in many different places.
So, now you can see that what a single neuron listens to, when it is listening to this crowd of other neurons around it depending on which cell it is listening to, those synapses are sitting on different parts of the dendrite and it is interpreting the input from those different parts of the dendrite in a unique way specific to that cell.
So it is almost as if every neuron has its own way of selectively listening to specific types of cells.
And this complicated map actually is just a map of what kind of synapse you are going to place or exist between different types of cells.
There are actually thousands, as close to three thousand different types of connections in this micro circuitry of the neocortex and we haven't recorded from all of them but what we have discovered was a set of principles that allow us to extrapolate that if you have a parametal cell and it is connecting with the Martinotti cell or any that have these electrical properties then it is going to use this type of synapse and if it is connecting onto a basket cell that has these electrical properties then it is going to use this type of synapse.
This way we actually have a way today to almost completely specify what kind of synapse exist between different pairs of cells even though we haven't recorded from all of them.
So, the caveats in what
I have showed you today is that synaptic dynamics may change during recording which I haven't told you but it is because the dynamics in a synapse may require an energy supply and if you patch a cell you may dilute the energy supply
ATP, and creating phosphate and other support systems.
So one has to be careful when studying dynamics to ensure that you are doing it in a way that you are not depleting to see a sort of rundown of the dynamics.
The second caveat is that there is a combinatorial principal, it depends on the identity of the pre and the post synaptic cell as to what kind of synapse they are going to put in there.
That means that you really need to solve a very big puzzle where you have all your cell types, versus all your cell types and you have to find out what type of synapse to put between all of them and that is not possible to do, even for a small piece of the brain let alone the whole brain but what is possible is to get some principal so you can infer that between this type of cell and that type of cell they are going to place this type of synapse.
The third caveat is that you need to understand dynamics you have to stimulate the pre-synaptic cell with a train of action potentials.
Many people stimulate with one spike then you are blind to the dynamics and if you stimulate with two spikes you can look into the theory it is impossible to work out what the dynamics are.
So, what is called the pen pulse protocol is insufficient to characterize synaptic dynamics and it is an important caveat to remember if one wants to characterize or interpret synaptic data that one finds in the literature.
Okay, so what you learned in this lecture was that there are strong frequency dependence synaptic dynamics in all connections in the neocortex there is no exceptions.
Most excitatory to excitatory synaptic transmission shows synaptic depression although there is depression between all kinds of cells and in some you have synaptic facilitation, typically onto certain types of inter-neurons or inhibitory cells, so they get activated with a delay.
And then the same axon can travel and have a depressing synapse and then the next bouton can have a facilitating synapse so when a single neuron communicates with a thousand other neurons it actually has different synapses to interpret the same message.
So it is like I am sending a broadcast signal, and everybody that is listening hears something different.
So, the last thing you have learned is that the synaptic dynamics depends on both the pre and post synaptic neurons so it is a partnering, so you take any two people, it depends on the identities of the two people as to how they are going to interpret what each other are saying.
Same person talks to another person there is a different interpretation because there is a different synapse.
Okay, that is it for this time, thank you.
