In this lecture, we are going to look at synaptic connections how do we characterize a synaptic connection and briefly look at what stochastic synaptic transmission is and some caveats.
So first of all before we go into looking at synaptic connections it is important to understand the location of synapses.
Where they are is extremely important for what the cell body will sense and hence react when it sends the input further.
So, the location is a very important feature and it is not just enough to say neuron
A is connected to neuron B.
In the case of detailed morphology the location is extremely important.
And here what you see is experiments very elegant experiments done by Stewart and Sakmann, where they put an electrode into the cell body, and then an electrode into the dendrites and they evoke this action potential in the cell body and it traveled backwards, because we can see the delay and then you see it in the dendrite after so it basically travels back and it is called the back-propagating action potential.
This is very important because this is a signal that mediates plasticity and many, many other things and it is a very important part... a lot of learning theory today.
So, this is a key experiment that is related to the current understanding of how neurons learn but it also illustrates that if this propagates back with a delay it is going to hit different synapses at different times so synapses that are sitting at different places could be effected in very different ways when action potentials propagate back.
This is another example if you had an input here in the dendrite and you inject a sharp current in the dendrite then this is what you see in the cell body.
Iran Segev is going to give you all the theory and the mathematics behind what happens from here to here but for now what is important to understand is that if you had synapes here it is quite different from having a synapse here, so location is important and this rationale is important for how your characterize a connection.
In the neocortex, there is actually only one connection out of thousands that could exist, that has been fully and extensively characterized and even in our lab we only did it once and then we did it with less and less data subsequently so this is this paper which is a comprehensive characterization and I will use it to illustrate what would be a sort of a comprehensive characterization of a synaptic connection.
So you record from two neurons, this is your one pipette your second pipette, and then this is the action axon going from one cell, and they have collaterals which you can't see here, and these collaterals move up and they touch, they form synapses on this other neuron, and when you excite this cell you produce an action potential then in this cell you see this response occurring and every time there is an action potential you can see sometimes it is a small response sometimes it is a bigger response, and a bigger response and so this cell is sending a message to this cell but it is receiving it with a different delay and latency which is here, it takes about one and a half millisecond for the information to get across to the cell, but there is a distribution and it also has different amplitudes so stochastic in its sense is it has different amplitudes and different latencies and we are going to explore why.
You can do a much more higher resolution view where you have what we call a pre-synaptic spike and then you can look at the response and you can characterize exactly this delay across many different connections.
Previously it was just in one connection you can see these delays but now you can see across many connections and you can see there is a lot of range.
So, some cells will take one millisecond to communicate with another cell other cells may take six milliseconds to communicate, the same types of cells, we got this big range of time delays between neurons.
Some responses will be very short and some responses will also rise very slowly so they could go very fast up and down where they could go slowly up and slowly down.
The amplitude also varies a lot, up to six actually we have even recorded even up to about 12mV for this kind of connection but most of them around 1mV range.
So, typically, when one neuron connects to another neuron it excites it, it is producing a
1mV depolarization, what we call an excitatory post-synaptic potential.
We can go a little bit further, and when you study these carefully, so you are triggering the spike here and you look at the response and then sometime it fails, nothing happens.
If you look at the amplitudes that you get you either get nothing or you get a distribution so you get a range of amplitudes that can be generated inside a single cell but then you have many connections where most of them don't fail.
So, this is rare for this type of connection where most of them don't fail.
So, this is rare for this type of connection but there are many others that fail and some of them can have very high failure rate so they try to communicate but nothing is getting through.
Here you can see an example, also, of a very strong connection, it is about 6.4 - 6.45 millivolts, but even on each trial there is a change in the amplitude and this is the range of the amplitude, as you can see. a change in the amplitude and this is the range of the amplitude, as you can see.
So, when neurons communicate they communicate with a jitter a range from 1ms to 6ms, and the amplitude can range anything from 1mV to 12mV, and we need to understand those mechanisms and how to recreate those mechanisms.
Okay so when you stain these neurons as we explained before how you stain them, you load a dye into these cells, this is a photograph under a microscope when you have developed this dye like a photograph, so you can see these cells.
You can follow the axon and their collaterals here you can follow them, and you can identify where the axon is touching the dendrite of the other cell.
And these areas are what we call putative synapses because at the light microscope level you can't identify whether it is real synapses or not, you can just say that because the axon is passing by and touching a dendrite and the axon is forming what is called a bouton, it is very likely that that is going to be a synapse.
But this can be verified by looking and doing an electron-microscopic analysis and here you see the pre-synaptic side with vesicles, these are synaptic vesicles you see here, and this is the cleft.
It is very difficult in experiments like this to get very high quality electro markers,
EM pictures, and this is the synapse this is the post-synaptic side.
So you can verify that, what we call physical touches are actual synapses at the electro-microscopic level.
Now, what is important in this is that when we did this analysis where it immediately became clear is that one neuron connects with another neuron by putting many synapses.
So, this is not a point contact, it is a hand contact.
Lots of synapses onto a single neuron.
And this is extremely important because it is a very strong rule in the neocortex and you will see that this rule later is one of the most important rules that allows you to actually predict connectivity in the whole circuit.
This is what is called the multi-synapse rule connectivity in the whole circuit.
This is what is called the multi-synapse rule and we are going to discuss it a lot more about that in the future.
The number of connections varies between the different pairs of cells some of them can have an average of 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 sometimes 10 connections so this is the distribution that you see.
The probability that one neuron will connect with another neuron is also quite low, it is around Pc=0.1 or 10% and we will discuss in future lectures what combining this knowledge with this knowledge means for connectivity.
It has actually a lot of relevance for understanding how neurons connect with each other.
So, this is just a view.
You can see that when multiple neurons connect there is a cloud of synapses that are formed so you can imagine when one neuron communicates there is a cloud of synapses that are formed so you can imagine when one neuron communicates with all these others, it is actually triggering lots and lots of little voltages in all the other neurons.
So this is not going to reveal how synapses work this you should read up in textbooks but just to remind you, you have the axon coming in it forms a bouton, actually pretty much it doesn't look like this, it has a bouton and the bouton has got mitochondria which you also see here, they are the powerhouses they produce ATP so that this thing can run it is below a micron, it is like half a micron typically and when the action potential propagates down the axon, it gets here, the voltage shocks the release of these vesicles and the chemical, the neuro-transmitter, diffuses to the other side in this case Glutamate in the excitatory connection and it activates receptors, different kinds of receptors here, AMPA, NMDA, Kainite and when these receptors are activated they open and ions flow in.
Sodium, potassium may flow out, calcium may flow in and so on.
But, let's look a little bit at the synaptic dynamics so as we said, we have one neuron it has in this case six synapses, and if you isolate and this you can do in the model, you isolate each of these that are located at different places, on the (INAUDIBLE) right and you look at this one individually and this one individually you can see that they have very different behaviors.
Different amplitudes, different rise times delay times, and what you see in the cell body is also quite different.
So, the location is very important and one has to bare in mind that when the single neuron communicates with a cell
So, the location is very important and one has to bare in mind that when the single neuron communicates with a cell each of the "fingers" that are communicating is actually exerting a different effect on the target cell.
Okay, let's briefly look at stochastic synaptic transmission.
This is a very big field as well, and there is a lot of very interesting ways to analyze how synapses work and you use methods called quantal analysis, where for example if only one vesicle or one synapse fired you would see this sort of response and that would be called the quantal size.
If two fired synapses are released, you would see a double amplitude if three, you would see a triple, and so on.
And in systems where these are very nice and clearly separated you see these bumps.
But in the central nervous system, in the neocortex because the synapses are in different places in the dendrites this becomes blurred and you basically see a very blurry distribution.
So it is very difficult to do what is called quantal analysis in central nervous system neurons and it is important if you can do it because you can actually identify how many vesicles, what is the amplitude what we call the quantal size how much impact does a single vesicle have or a single synapse have on the post-synaptic side.
As an exercise, try to answer for yourself the following question.
What is the probability of successful transmission if you have five synapses in a connection, and each with a probability of
0.5 of releasing when an action potential comes along?
So, you got five synapses, each one has the probability of 50% chance of releasing.
What is the chance that you will have a complete failure?
Or what is the chance that it will always be a success?
Also calculate what is the mean amplitude if each quantal size was just one.
So what would be the average five, each one with the 0.5 probability, they each produce one if they worked what would be the average?
And calculate what is the coefficient of variation of the transmission.
If you need help, look at this paper.
Okay, let's look at some caveats.
So, the first caveats is that it is very difficult to obtain detailed characterizations of synaptic connections.
What I showed you is one connection that is being extensively characterized and since then we have only partially characterized up to about twenty-two other connections.
And there are hundreds that remain and that is one of the reason why
I have to do reconstruction because you can actually predict most of those others now and that is what we are going to do during the course of this MOOC and illustrate how that is done.
You also cannot verify easily that when an axon touches a dendrite that it is a real synapse and you can't always do electron microscopy.
So, you do have to have data that tells you what is your confidence that this is a synapse.
And then the last caveat is that the classical quantal analysis where you can kind of peel out what is the effective and individual synaptic vesicle or an individua synapse and the probability that it is releasing the size that it is releasing and how the whole connection works is quite difficult because of the uncertainty about the locations, the locations are distributed the number of vesicles that are released maybe one or two or three and then you may have many synapses.
So, these things make the quantal analysis more difficult in central nervous system but it is not impossible there are statistical approaches around it.
And to summarize what we learned in this lecture, the most important thing to remember is all synaptic connections in the neocortex are multi-synapse connections they are hand connections, they are not finger connections.
Synaptic responses vary because every release site is probabilistic, the vesicle can release probabilistically, different synapses can behave probabilistically, the size of the vesicle can also vary slightly not hugely, but slightly and then the locations of the synapses on the dendrites can vary a lot.
The third piece of information that you learned here was that the number of the synapses per connections depends on the type of connection, so if I have...
I showed you an example, where it is just parametal cells and they may form between
3 and 8 connections if you go to a different type of cell it may be between
5 and 20 synapses and so every pair actually has its own range of numbers of connections.
And then lastly, because of stochasticity in both the latency and amplitude vary, with the action potential one has to bear in mind that it is a really very noisy signal that is being transmitted from one neuron to another.
Okay, that is it for this lecture.
