In the last parts of this presentation
I would like to talk more about the minimum information, about neuroscience dataset.
And to start with I'm just going to repeat what MINDS, a MIND compliant dataset should include.
It should define the specimen it has been generated from and it should include the age of the specimen, it's sex, the species, the strain.
And again, you should already be recognizing some of these elements:
I mean these 3, for instance.
We've already seen that a vocabulary exists to define these things.
The concept of an entity of classification such as cell types or neuron.
The concept of brain location whether you want to use an ontological term to define a logical area, or even spatial coordinates if you happen to have this precise information.
You want to have the contributors that enable the generation of these datasets and their affiliation so use can give credit to them.
You want to define the method and parameters used, generate a data, and the dates they already were created on.
You want to describe the data category and the specific data format you have used to save these data.
You want to describe how to access data so where is it stored, and the format, and finally, you want the license information so someone can inform itself as to whether they can actually re-use this information.
So, what are the benefits of the MINDS compliant datasets?
So, first you have to see MINDS as a very useful tool to create a community consensus as to how to describe in the context of neuroscience the properties of a dataset.
And some of these properties are extremely useful and we'll see why actually in the next slides.
Next, that provides us consistency in the process of integrating the data into a platform, so if we really enforce these MINDS compliants we know that all datasets will have specimen and point us a brain region, and people typically are very focused on specimen and very specific parts of the brain that really enables them to find other datasets that can really help them moving forward in their research.
It gives power to the search facilities by just having this consistency in the type of information stored and the vocabularies being used to define them, it gives another power to search facilities.
And finally, it is with a medium to find similar and related datasets, this is in the next part we're going to look at.
So, here, I have listed quite a few examples of similarity and relatedness examples that can be leveraged from simply annotating your datasets that are in the MINDS recommendations.
So I'm just going to list them and illustrate where appropriate.
You could find dataset that come from the same species but different strains, different kinds of ruts, for instance.
You could also search for datasets located in nearby brain regions.
You can look for the same brain regions, but in different species or strain.
You can use a neuron with a broader cell classification.
So, for instance, your neuron may have been categorized as the Martinotti cell, but now you want to look at neurons that are not only Martinotti cell, but more generally inhibitory cells.
So, again, playing with a hierarchy of your ontology, this is something you can do.
You can look at all the data category in the same brain region because bringing different angles to the data you're currently using you might strengthen actually your position in discovering something.
You could use the same data category but in a different brain region.
For instance, you have electrophysiology in the thalamus and you want to get electrophysiology datasets in a different brain region and make a comparison between them:
What is different between these two brain regions?
You could use the dataset by the same lab or contributor, or finally, another dataset generated with the exact same protocol or derived protocol.
