In the last part of this presentation
I would like to talk more about the minimal information about the Neuro-science data set and to start with, I'm just going to repeat what MINDS, a MINDS-compliant data set should include.
It should define the specimen it has been generated from and this should include the age of the specimen its sex, the species, the strain.
And again, you should already be recognizing some of these elements, these three, for instance we've already seen that they have vocabulary existing to define these things.
The concept of an entity classification such as cell types for NEURON the concept of a brain location, whether you want to use and ontologycal term to define a logical area or even spacial coordinates if you happen to have this precise information.
You want to have the contributors that enable the generation of these data sets and their affiliations so you can leave credits to them.
You want to define the method and parameters used to generate the data, and the dates they were created on.
You want to describe the data category and the specific data format you have used to save this data.
You want to describe how to access the data so where is it stored, and the format.
And finally you want the licence information so someone can inform himself about whether they can re-use this information.
So what are the benefits of a MINDS-compliant data set?
First, you have to see MINDS as a very useful tool that creates a community consensus, as to how to describe in the context of neuro-science, the properties of a data set and some of these properties are extremely useful and we'll actually see why in the next slide.
Next, that provides us consistency in the process of integrating the data into a platform, so if we really enforce this MINDS compliance, you know that all your data sets will have a specimen, and for instance, the brain region, and people typically are very focused on the specimen and the very specific parts of the brain and that really enables them to find other data sets that can really help them move forward in their research.
It gives power to the search facilities by just having this consistency in the type of information stored, and the vocabularies being used to define them, it gives a lot of power to the search facilities.
And finally it is really a medium to find similar and related data sets and this is really the next part we're going to look at.
So here, I have listed quite a few examples of similarity and relatedness examples that can be leveraged from simply annotating your data sets following the MINDS recommendations, so I'm just going to list them and illustrate where appropriate.
So, you could find data sets that came from the same species but different strains, different kinds of rats for instance.
You could also search for data sets located in nearby brain regions.
You can look for the same brain regions but in different species or strain.
You can use a neuron with a broder cell classification so for instance, your neuron may have been categorized as the Martinotti cell, but now you want to look at neurons that are not only Martinotti cells, but more generally inhibitory cells.
So again, playing with the hierarchy of your ontology.
This is something you can do.
You can look at other data categories in the same brain region because bringing different angles to the data you're currently using you might strengthen your position in discovering something.
You could use the same data category but in a different brain region for instance you have electro-physiology in the thalamus and you want to get the electro-physiology data sets in a different brain region and make a comparison between them.
What is different between these two brain regions?
You could use another data set by the same lab or contributor, or finally another data set generated with the exact same protocol or derived protocol.
