So, in this slide we're going to look a little deeper into ontologies.
So, Sean has already given you basic information about what ontologies are, and I will not expand on this.
What I'm really interested in doing here is to show you for the domain of neuroscience which ontologies we have decided to integrate in our
Blue Brain Nexus platform.
So, a lot of the ontologies we have integrated have been either taken from the Neuroscience
Information Framework or co-developed with them.
The goal of NIF is to define these concepts for the domain of neuroscience and share them so the community can re-use them and have a common agreement on how to define neuroscientific concepts.
They have defined the NIF standard ontologies which integrate a number of existing ontologies such as, (INAUDIBLE), for instance to define Brain regions in a manner that is agnostic of which specimen or species they come from,
(Gaby?) for instance for the description of small molecules the gene ontology or OBE, and quite a few others.
Now in this part here, what I would like to illustrate is a number of ontologies we have decided to use in the Blue Brain Nexus platform for the domain of neuroscience.
So, for instance, around the specimens we have the definition of species and strain so this is really helping in defining what kind of animal or subject that was, so these two we have created them ourselves.
This is the part of the NCBI, taxonomy.
And so, whenever dealing with ontologies it is really important to do enough research to find out if there is any vocabulary already existing in the community so that we can just leverage them.
It really would be a waste of time for us to reinvent what is already working and well accepted by the community, but there's also a strong advantage in using and reusing these already defined vocabularies, and very simply if someone describes a rat with a very specific concept and you have also defined a rat with the same concept so even if you're storing your data in different places they become compatible, you know that what you call a rat is also what they call a rat, and so if, for instance, in your lab you deal with electrophysiology only and that other person deals only with morphology at least, the data is compatible at the level of the species and it is very clear to deduce from the use of the vocabulary you have chosen.
The next one will be just a vocabulary to define a sex of the specimen, male or female.
Then we have a number of ontologies for the description of data sets.
So we have the category, so what kind of data set is it?
Is it electrophysiology, or morphology image imagery data.
That's the specific data format that is used to serialize this data, the raw data, when you save it on your disk it is a concrete format that you have chosen and so there's a way in the meta data to describe this and this becomes very important if you look for electrophysiology in a very specific format because you have a workflow that requires it you can then filter the data on the platform and only get those that match and will become compatible with what you're trying to achieve.
Next, we have a licence ontology, which allows us to define who can re-use the data you are publishing into the platform.
So I will not underestimate this one.
If you decide that your data cannot be re-used for commercial purposes you can actually define that there.
Finally we have the storage of the data set and this is a way to describe where you have stored your data.
So it can be, through the platform, in which case you don't really need to know where it's configured, you just have to know that the people managing the platform have configured it in a way that the data is going to be backed up and is safe.
But if you were to store the data on an external storage to the platform here we have an ontology to actually allow you to describe this.
So you can easily find the data.
For instance, it is stored in a cloud on Amazon and you can define it there.
Then we have the concept of sample classification which is really important to us, because from a lot of the data sets we are integrating, scientists take the time to make statements on the entities: we integrate, neurons, for instance and it will give them electric types morphology types, and so, we have the designed ontology that allows that description with NIF.
Finally, another way to classify them is to define what kind of neurotransmitters some entities are so that's another kind of ontology but I won't get into the details of that here.
A lot of the data we integrate really makes sense when we anchor it in specific brain spaces.
So we have a number of existing brain atlases that are references for specific species, whether it is the Allen mouse CCFv3 or the Waxholm for the rat we have an ontology that defines the logical reference for these spaces and these can be annotated at the level of a data set.
More detailed in that concept is the parcellation schemes.
So here we enter, still within the concept of anchoring data into an atlas, now we want to, what we talked about in which specific region of an atlas so your data set is to be anchored.
And so different atlas spaces come with parcellation schemes where anatomists have just looked at this space and defined sub-volumes of this space that correspond to specific brain regions or brain parcels.
So we have three here, which I've put as examples actually we have quite a few others, and these define, again, a vocabulary to describe these brain regions.
But they are really specific to that atlas space.
Finally, we have some ontologies to describe... that are really linked more to the provenance concepts that really allows to enrich it.
So, for instance, we have the type of the activity run whether it is an experimental type ran in the lab or a computational task, you know, simply run in a computer or classification activity, so you have these very short vocabularies that really enable you to describe via the activity you want to define, and later on filter through the semantic searches.
Then we have measurement methods, so an ontology to describe what kind of methods you have applied to generate new entities.
And finally, the role of the agents involved in a given activity whether it was like the principle investigator of a project or a researcher doing accurate experiments in the lab.
So this is not fully exhaustive, but it is a set of ontologies we use to annotate our data in the context of neuro science.
So here just to tie it all together and show you that we have a central place where you can actually introspect all these ontologies.
We have what we call the ontology viewer.
So if you open this with an application you can list all the ontologies currently available and integrated into the platform.
And so here we have regrouped them by logical topics so we have a number of parcellation schemes and you can see, if I take the Waxholm Space you can look into white matter.
So here, you can see in the video the hierarchy of this brain region and the relations that that region is further defined by these three other sub-regions.
And through here you can really introspect every ontology we have done.
So if you want to have a look at electrophysiology it has a parent term that is physiological data and here you have the specific data set category that allows you to define:
"This data set is an electrophysiology recording."
The nice thing you can do with that is that if you have used this vocabulary to describe your data and you're interested in, not only electrophysiology but also, say, functional imaging you could leverage the hierarchy of this ontology for instance, by using the term
"physiological data" and the system is intelligent enough to know that because you have annotated with
"electrophysiology" it knows that electrophysiology is a sub-type of physiological data and so it will retrieve from the system all electrophysiology, as well as functional imaging effective connectivity, and functional connectivity.
So you can really leverage the power of ontologies and more abstract concepts to make interesting scientific questions.
