So next I will take you to the steps of creating your own domain, so here I'm still going to stay in the realm of neuroscience but typically the way this happens is that scientists come to us and they just describe their needs with the platform and that allows us together to define a specific entity.
So here, we've taken the example of a neuron and through discussion with the scientist, we have identified that it needs to have a name, it needs to have a morphology type and an electrical type each of which are going to be based on specific ontologies that already predefined these morphological types and electrical types.
And so, once this has been written, typically by a knowledge engineer in the Blue Brain Nexus project.
These can be then pushed into the platform register where people can start using it.
So the next step is now I have two scientists that are both working on their own favorite neurons, and they have done experiments and they have identified that, in the top part here that neuron is a pyramidal cell, and is also a stuttering cell.
You can then, through either parametric interface or through a ware application, enter this information push it into the platform, but other scientists can do the same thing.
And should they set the ACL, so the Access Control Lists correctly on their own respective entities, and share it with people from their group, and let's assume these three people are working in the same group.
And that person can then request from the platform:
"Show me all neurons." and you're getting back the two entities that these two scientists have defined.
So it is a simplistic example, but all of that we have been able to do without having to modify the platform without writing code, and just designing new things declaring things into the platform and automatically people can start using it and get values out of it.
And we find that amazing.
So, we've just seen an example on how to define your own domain.
Now many domains have already been defined by other communities.
And so I just want to take a few minutes to describe a few existing domains that you might want to consider reusing so here, this is probably the most used vocabulary on the internet today in the age of Facebook, LinkedIn it's called the FOEF, or Friend of a Friend.
It simply describes a person and their social network.
And it's a very simple concept, but FOEF has defined a very specific vocabulary that allows you to define someone or a piece of software.
So, for instance here, we can define the name of a person its title, you can have images that depict that person and you can have the Family name, the Given name.
Here, quite an important piece of vocabulary is the other people that that person knows so this is how you start describing your social network and connecting that person to other people.
And I will not read all these attributes, but there's a number of others you could potentially be using whether that person has a chat line from Jabber, so you can connect with it or that person works for a very specific organization so potentially in the Blue Brain Nexus you could take this vocabulary select the properties that are interesting to you and register the concept of an agent or a person leveraging this vocabulary, making very clear that it comes for FOAF, and just start using it.
So the previous example was really outside of the neuroscience field.
And here for the sake of illustrating neuroscience
I want to take another domain that really is in the realm of neuroscience and so an IDM is one of such domains that deal with the neuro-imaging data model and so, we're not planning to get into deep details of how this is described but we can see here that the whole community has come together to define a very specific kind of workflow.
So, it covers the acquisition of imagery data it caters for the representation of the raw data that has been acquired the description of specific analysis and workflows .
It allows you to represent derived data from what you have acquired and to do so, it leverages the W3C-Prove just like we do in
Blue Brain Nexus.
You can also capture the publications that have been created from whatever workflows derived data you have created and as well as the distribution and sharing of the queries via a common API.
So this is more of the platform, I guess of their own, but as the specific data model here, all of these could be leveraged in Blue Brain Nexus by just importing a very specific domain and declaring it as within the name space of NIDM and just reuse it.
The community, like I said, has already spent time defining these carefully.
By leveraging it you also render the data you push into the platform and make it compatible with data sitting on other data repositories potentially, which is a very powerful way to combine data.
Here we have a very brief overview of the NIDM domain representation and here they are leveraging the visual representation of the W3C-Prove and so you can see just the main elements which are the project on which you're working the specific study and the acquisition of data.
And here again they emphasize that they are using the following provenance elements and you find again and you should be familiar with it, it consists of agents of activity, of entity, and attributes.
So, again a really powerful way to leverage existing domain and vocabularies and bring them into your Blue Brain Nexus instance.
