Here we're going to have a look at the overall architecture of this platform, and we are going to get into a great amount of details, but just so that you know what is part of this platform what part is generic and can be applied to any domain, and what part is maybe more specific to neuro science.
The top part is really the generic part, here.
And we have a number of application here on the left.
We have our Search Clients which will allow you to once you've entered the data into the platform browse and navigate the provenance of the entities that you have entered, and look at all the details view the data set, download data and really explore everything you have put into the platform.
We have the Provenance Viewer, a graphical application that allows you to really navigate this provenance graph and discover new things, introspect parts of it.
We have an Ontology Viewer, like I said ontologies are really a core concept of our semantic engine and we have this application that lists all the ontologies that have been integrated into our platforms we have a central place to go, review them, and check, find specific information that you want to use maybe in one of your processes.
We have a Provenance Editor, which is an application which allows you to edit specific entities, make revisions...
While the platform have an API to interface with where data is stored, not everybody is a programmer and we feel that there's a need for a user-friendly simple way to bring more information into the platform, and so this is the place where you want to do it.
And finally, this is still to come in the platform: a Domain Editor that would allow here again a user-friendly way to design your domain, create your entities define the properties, and put this information into the platform make it available so people can start collecting this kind of data.
At the very bottom here, we have the Atlas viewer and this is really a neuro science specific application leveraging the platform so domain specific applications can be developed on top of this platform.
This one in particular allows you to introspect a 3D brain volume and look at specific annotations of this brain volume and so, maybe I will demonstrate that.
Here for instance,
I will load
Allan mouse data sets.
Now we're going to look at the corronal orientation of this specific data set and we can zoom into the brain, we could look at different slices of it on the left hand side of it you can see that this one's generated by the Allan institute for Brain Science you can have the information about the specific specimen it was a mouse, it was 56 days post-natal, you can see the distribution of the data set, the specific protocol that allows generating this this data sets, and finally you can draw more information on top of this image to highlight the specific brain region we are currently here highlighting.
That's an example of the application that is really domain specific.
Now we're going to focus on the right hand side of this architecture, and the first thing that I want to to describe is this, so called,
Rest API, and this is really what people who are able to write programs whether it's in python, in java, in go, these people are able to interface with the platform through computer programs and can very easily automate tasks whether it is to push data into the platform or to run searches to execute workflows all of this can be done using the Rest API which again I want to stress it is programming language agnostic and today is a very common way to access computer systems.
Behind this Rest API, which is something you cannot interface with directly, everything has to be done through the front of the rest API, we have other services that will allow you to do your domain definition, so in which you find the concept of Provenance, like I said, it is already provided with the platform and you will bring in your your own Entity schemas, so that's how you register new entities into the platform.
The Knowledge Graph, of course has the concept of ontologies the entities you have entered that themselves are defined on the Entity schemas and the raw data you want to attach to some of the entities.
Like I said earlier, security is (INAUDIBLE) and so we have these two services here and ACL service, which stands for Access Control Lists and this is really the mechanism to tell the platform that the specific entities is only visible to me or only visible to my research group or can be viewed by anyone on the internet, so that can be at the level of the meta data but also at the level of the raw data.
And these ACLs are intricately linked to the identity service which is really, well, imagine you go to a website and you log in: you have your own identity and the system recognizes and acknowledges this identity before they let you into the system.
So first you have to identify yourself and once you're identified we can use the ACL service to find out if you have access to this part, can we actually show it to you and all these decisions are made behind the scene prior to dispatching the information to you.
Now on the lower part we have some specific APIs that are also domain specific, so we have an Image Service which really is the back-end of this application we have looked at.
So obviously this application is interfacing with the Rest API but behind the scene this
Rest API dispatches requests to get tides of your specific brain slice and the Rest API relays this information to your (INAUDIBLE) application.
Similarly we have this other application called the Voxel Brain this API is really another way to organize data in a brain Atlas.
So, imagine the 3D volume, that is the Brain you are studying you only have additional information for instance, the density of the specific kind of neuron and so that 3D volume can be sliced into very little cubes so 3D shapes.
Voxel is really the 3D counterpart of a Pixel and so people decided to call that a voxel.
So it is just a little 3D shape in which you store, for instance a numerical value, so if I know that I have X value in that specific Voxel,
I can store it there and so we have this API that allows you to say:
"Well that very specific region of the Brain give me all the Voxels"
"annotated with density of a specific kind of neuron"
"and let me work with that."
And so this API will return this information to the user then let them execute their usecase with information.
