In this session, I will be talking about another aspect of neuroinformatics, which is Brain Atlases and the link, also, to the Knowledge Space.
Brain Atlases are actually important in neuroinformatics for organizing data, because they establish a link between the semantics and space.
A Brain Atlas actually consists of three things.
One is a coordinate space, defined by a 3D template volume a parcellation, which is  the parcel, the Brain regions typically within that volume defined by a 3D boundary, and an ontology, or defined names and relationships between those brain regions defined by the parcellations.
So these atlases can be used to integrate data using either the coordinates of the space or the semantic tags from the ontologies and both can be used to integrate. or the semantic tags from the ontologies and both can be used to integrate.
So, on this slide
I’ll show how you can search for data, data that’s been registered and annotated with the ontologies, and once you’ve annotated the data you can actually search for a property, for example a type of the cell, a Martinotti cell when you search for it, you immediately find all those cells that have been tagged by Martinotti or parametal cell type, you can find it, discover it and actually filter out for a specific cell type and go and find out further details and download the data.
So, this is important because all of those aspects the data that have been registered with the meta data that make it discoverable.
But then, with Atlases if you tag the brain region that the neuron morphology is coming from you can find data also according to the specific brain region.
And here we’re looking at a particular data set from a collaborator in China from Wu Han the Britain Chance
Center for
Biomedical Photonics where they’ve done a whole brain
Center for
Biomedical Photonics where they’ve done a whole brain
Golgi scan of the rat brain and by viewing that, you can see individual morphologies throughout any part of the brain and by overlaying the brain regions you can find out which brain regions are those from.
Now, we’ve also integrated the Allen Reference Atlas the latest common coordinate framework, and from each brain region you can find out the name of the regions, but also we’ve searched to something called
Knowledge Space which is really a way of searching for data from around the world, including our own Knowledge Graph.
So, goes back and finds you data from the hippocampus that has been registered within the Knowledge Graph, but in addition it will allow you to go off and search data from databases from around the world.
So for thalamus you can see many different types of data physiology, gene expression, models, and so on, from other databases.
Now if we go back to the more occipital area, say the primary visual cortex in the mouse, the primary visual area layer five this is where the Allen institute has been working to capture a lot of different neuron types and actually this provides a way searching linking out of the atlas, to go directly to the Allen Institute’s data, it’s all indexed all linked in to those atlases as well as their electrophysiological data, which is provided as well.
So, the KnowledgeSpace is that place, you just saw that the Atlas links to the knowledge space,
So, the KnowledgeSpace is that place, you just saw that the Atlas links to the knowledge space, but the Knowledge
Space is actually the online encyclopedia that you can use to search for any particular neuroscience concept, in this case, say, we can go to the neocortex you get a definition of that, you can find the related literature, you can find for example, how much literature has been published per year, the place of neocortex within a particular ontology, and then link out to the other data sets, in this case neuromorpho.org which has large number of morphologies from neocortex and you can find other types of data as we’ve seen before, from the Allen Institute, specific layer five parametal cells, and actually go in and directly go get that data.
So in this session, you’ve learned about organizing data using Brain Atlases, searching for data, finding data via a Brain Atlas, and through that integration the common ontologies and also knowledge-space.org which is an online encyclopedia the common ontologies and also knowledge-space.org which is an online encyclopedia that is integrated with this ecosystem using the common ontologies to discover data that’s federated from around the world.
