Here, we have defined already our provenance pattern, but we have also been told by the scientists that they want to capture the protocol that will allow to generate the various entities in this provenance pattern, and also to capture the agents that  contributed or were part of these activities.
So I have now introduced these three levels.
The concept of an activity from which we can also add protocols and agents and so on...
So originally, we only had these links, and so now we have the ability to ensure the additional information the scientist does need.
At this stage, now we can define all the fields that are defining an activity.
So, not so many. We have a type, like I said, we're going to differentiate experimental activity from potentially others like classifications.
We have the method that has been used, so in ontology terms describing the specific methods, and we have measurement methods, ontology for that.
We want to define the protocol and this protocol will be further defined down here.
And finally, we have the list of agents that is defined here.
So an agent is also accompanied by its role in the activity, and we have an ontology for that as well.
If you get a little further on the definition of the protocol it's not again very much there but we want to give it a title.
We want to give it a description, and you could see that as the materials and methods of a typical scientific publication.
So, a thorough description of all the steps that led to the execution of this activity.
And finally, if there are any known publications that describe this protocol, you can capture them using the concept of cross references here shortened to Xref which is defined here.
And so, a cross reference is simply built with two fields:
A database which can be for instance a DOI or (INAUDIBLE) and then an identifier.
If you have selected a database
DOI, then you would put the DOI identifier.
And if you've selected (INAUDIBLE) you will make sure you have a (INAUDIBLE) IDENTIFIER.
Just a very simple way to describe a cross reference.
On the lower part now we can have a look at the agents and here we have the given name, which is a string.
The family name a string, the email which is very important so we can facilitate contacts to the people.
And the affiliation that agent, that person was related to.
And the affiliation is this right here, we can have the laboratory the person works in, and finally the organisation that person works in.
And so we have here, a definition of the activity that does capture enough details so the scientists can ask the question they wanted to ask.
