In the next part, I have already done this design, and I'm going to present it to you now.
So here are the entities and the specific fields we're going to put on them.
So, if you remember, we had drawn a first entity
I called rat. 
And just for the sake of having something sufficiently generic,
I've called it here,
Specimen so we could also later on apply it to mouse, human, and potentially other species.
So the species itself is captured through an ontology term as one field, one property.
And then we have the strain, which is another ontology.
Turns out that these two, we've already discussed these, are coming from the NCBI taxonomy, but still thse two fiels are separated.
And we need to capture the sex of the specimen and finally its age.
And as you see here, it is not yet a literal value.
For instance, I could have put 14 and define that it is always expressed in days.
Here, I want to give a little more flexibility to the users of this domain.
And so I have decided to define another entity called
Specimen Age and so the fields age here, is of type Specimen Age which itself is defined just beside it.
And so the Specimen Age is made of three properties.
1) is the value, the specific age.
The unit, and here I want to constrain this value, the unit, to three potential units can be in days, can be expressed in months or in years, and it's a floating value, so you could put 1.5 years if you wanted, or 3 days just the same.
And finally we have the period which can be pre natal or post natal.
Again we have constrained the model and only these two values can be defined in the submitted entity, and if you fail to reuse one of these, the system will just fail validation and let you know so you can correct your data submission.
Next, we're going to talk about the neuron.
So here, we have defined simply three properties.
The name, because to a scientist it might be important to give it the name that was used in the lab or something intelligible that will speak to the intended audience that will consume this data.
So we have the name of the neuron and then we have two more properties:
The morphological type, which here are written shorter as "mtype", which is of type ontology, and we have an existing cell type ontology that you can review at your leisure in the ontology viewer application
I showed in earlier videos.
And we have another property called "etype", which is based on the very same ontology but a different branch of it.
And as you can see just here, there is no data attached to the neuron just like there was no data attached to the specimen.
Next, we have the data set.
And here, at this stage,
I didn't see a need to actually differentiate the electrophysiology recording from the morphology reconstruction but we could have done.
So here I'm going to use the data sets entity for both these different types of data sets.
We can give a name to our data set:
It's just a plain chain of characters, string.
We have a category which is based on the ontology data category.
So far, so good. We have a mime type which is really the file format you have used to save your file on disk after running the experiment that generated the data.
And finally a license, where you can see well whether it is like usable commercially or not commercially.
And the last thing we need to say here is that we want to allow a user to attach raw data to a data set.
This is crucial.
