That was part one of this scientists interview.
Now we want to interview another person.
Actually it could be the same, but here
I'm depicting it as a different person.
The first one was with the person generating the data.
The second one is more of the user of the integrated data, and we are very curious to find out what it is they want to do with integrated data because this is going to help us to design the entities further and add all the relevant properties on entities that will enable interesting scientific queries to be run.
So I'm going to read through these statements and this is going to drive later on the design of the entities.
So the scientist wants to get data related to a specimen's species, strain, or age.
So that means that species, the strain and the age are things you want to be able to add into your queries. For instance, give me all data sets that derives from a rat, or mouse, or a human.
Same thing for the strain, and same thing for the age.
The scientist wants to be able to get all data sets from a given neuron.
So again, that strengthens the assumption that we need to have a neuron entity.
This is good, and derivation has to be made from this neuron entity.
The scientist wants to get data sets by title, with have called that category previously.
So we'll have to think of putting this data set category property on our data set.
And here, the scientist wants to get the data set by file format.
So again we'll have to think about integrating an ontology that that represents specific file formats so distinctions could be made of the electrophysiology, we called it in Igor format which is one known format or NWB for instance which is another format.
The scientist wants to get neurons by classification.
So in that case, we can figure out this by either electric type, or morphological type.
Then the scientist wants to get data by the protocol used.
So we will have to think at the level of the activity to capture the protocol and some forms and we will describe later a proposal for that.
And the scientist wants to get data that specific people generated, so there again the W3C provenance is already offering that through the means of the concept of agent.
So as long as we tie people who generated the data to the agent concept of the W3C Prov which will be able to do that. So 
I think we are in quite a good shape to carry on.
