Welcome everybody to my part of this course.
I will be speaking today,
I have a big challenge today to introduce to you the nerve cells, in particular the electrical activity of these nerve cells. 
My name is professor Idan Segev from the Hebrew University and what I will do today is actually start with a motivation just to introduce the electrical activity of the brain,
I'm sure you all know that the brain is an electrical device not only, but certainly it is an electrical device we can record electrical activity from the brain for example, by EEG from the skull but today we’re interested to understand much more about the elementary units, the nerve cells that generate this electrical activity.
So, I will start with the introduction of the neuron as this is the elementary unit building block of the nervous system any nervous system.
I will introduce the structure of the neuron first and then I will go to show you that this neuron has a special electrical activity, very unique. Actually there is two type of electrical activity.
One type is called the spike, generated in one part of the nerve cell, and the other type of the electrical activity is called the synaptic potential. one part of the nerve cell, and the other type of the electrical activity is called the synaptic potential.
So, basically the same neuron, the same nerve cell carries two types of electrical activity, the spike in the axon and the synaptic potential in the dendrite, we shall try along the course here to see how does one mathematically model these two electrical phenomenon the spike and the synapses.
And so, I will show you later in the next part that what underlies this electrical activity is charged ion channels that cross the membrane of the nerve cell and this crossing of the nerve cell’s membrane generates electrical activity.
Then I will go to a model, a mathematical model generated by Hodgkin and Huxley, published in 1952 a wonderful work where by a set of equations that we shall introduce here summarize in a compact way the mathematics of the spike.
So, we can today use
Hodgkin-Huxley mathematically in the computer to replicate, and you will see it, to replicate the activity of the spike following this monumental work of
Hodgkin-Huxley before the World War published later in 1952.
And then I’ll go to the other signal: the synaptic potentials.
These are the signals that run in another region of the neuron in dendrites, and I will show you how to model synaptic potentials.
And then there will be the challenge to connect the two.
I have to show you how the synaptic potential is generated locally in the dendrites, propagate from
I have to show you how the synaptic potential is generated locally in the dendrites, propagate from the side of origin to the other side of the neuron to the axon.
And so, I will try to combine these two signals as the neuron does and show you eventually how the input the synaptic input, the synaptic potentials eventually together, many of them generate a spike in the other part of the neuron, in the axon.
So, this will be a summary kind of lesson or session whereby I will take the modeling of synaptic potentials
I will show you how these synaptic potentials bombard one part of the neuron, the dendrite and generate in the other part of the neuron an electrical signal another electrical signal called the spike.
So, this is the plan for today.
