So here we come to great explorers, to great investigators the Hodgkin and Huxley.
So now, I'm going to explain to you, slowly, the mathematical model of Hodgkin and Huxley, you see both of them here, that really got there for their success in understanding the spike what they used to call the "action potential" we even use this term today so for understanding the mathematics of the spike what is the underlying mechanism first and how do I describe this mechanism in order to understand mathematically mathematically describe the spike.
What Hodgkin and Huxley did, and for that they got a Nobel prize in 1962, is the following.
First of all they found very, very convenient preparation the squid that you see in the middle.
This is a very useful preparation because this particular animal has a very unique axon.
This is now an axon, here is an axon... here is an axon of the squid, it's called the squid giant axon it is giant, it is from here to here, it's a very thick axon, in our brain, our axon are very thin something of the order of a 1μm a thousandth of a millimeter, in diameter very thin but in the squid you have thick big axons the squid giant axon, that's what it's called.
Giant to the level that it's a half of a millimeter and this enabled Hodgkin and Huxley actually for the first time to directly record the electrical activity from the inside of this axon, because they succeeded to penetrate with a wire into the axon and really record the electrical activity or the voltage difference between the inside and the outside directly in this giant axon of the squid.
As I said, what Hodgkin and Huxley did they succeeded to take the squid axon here and put a wire inside an axon here, so this is this wire I spoke about there, this is an electrode recording the voltage from within comparing it to the voltage outside.
So they really measured the voltage drop the voltage difference between the inside and outside.
Before I defined the membrane voltage as the difference between the inside and outside across the membrane
I said that at rest the voltage is -70mV or something like that, inside versus outside.
But what happens in the squid giant axon?
They used a stimulation, they stimulated the axon because without stimulation it would sit at rest something like -70mV at rest,
W=without any perturbation, but now they stimulate here the axon by making the inside more positive than it was before.
So instead of -70mV, the move the voltage to -50mV or -40mV, so the injected current inside of the cell.
And here's what they found.
When you do this you depolarize we call it depolarize, you make the inside more positive than the rest, so instead of being -70mV you depolarize the cell to a given level and suddenly you get this "boom", this white signal, the spike it behaves on its own.
We just brought the membrane to this region to a given threshold, voltage threshold and suddenly there's a huge phenomenon something as I mentioned of the order of 100mV so it's an all-or-none phenomenon.
It happens or does not happen, and when it happens it has this very prototypical shape.
A 100mV or so in amplitude about 1ms in duration and then it's gone.
This was the first inter-cellular direct recording by Hodgkin and Huxley actually in 1939.
They saw the signal.
But of course seeing the signal on its own does not mean that you understand the origin, the mechanism the underlying the signal.
And that's where the genius of Hodgkin and Huxley came because they systematically analyzed in four papers actually more, but in 1952, there are four papers, A, B, C and then the D paper,
1952 D, is the theoretical the mathematical paper explaining the signal in full.
Very beautifully, very compactly, a very beautiful mathematical model for understanding the spike.
So, first they showed experimentally that this is indeed and all-or-none, zero and one phenomenon.
So look, if they stimulated, if they shift the voltage from -70mV, which is here, by let's say a few millivolts let's say, to here they got some voltage response, which decays.
So this is another attempt, sub-threshold, it decays.
But if you reach enough voltage if you depolarize if you shift the membrane potential from -70mV enough, something of the order of 20mV more positive than -70mV, let's say between -70mV you shift the voltage by injecting the current into the cell, positive current inside the cell then you suddenly see this phenomenon rising.
So this is an action potential.
And if you inject it even stronger, inside the cell you get another action potential.
But all of this action potential have the same shape and when they appear, they appear in full. there is no half-action potential, or a third-action potential.
It's an all or none phenomenon.
So it's either sub-threshold, where you don't get a spike or it's super-threshold, when you get a full spike.
And again, the threshold is more positive than the resting potential.
So the spike starts from
-70mV or -50mV and then it goes
100mV high and then it disappears after
1ms, 2ms, or 3ms.
So that's the all-or-none property of the spike.
It's a very interesting signal as I said, it appears in axons and this was very lucky for Hodgkin and Huxley to have this squid giant axon where they could record from the inside and from the outside and can manipulate ion concentrations which I'll show you in a second but they could study the spike directly in this squid's giant axons and amazingly the same mechanism of spike generation in axon of the squid giant axon is also true from most of the axons we know today.
So this basic mechanism that
Hodgkin and Huxley found is really universal for axons of many types including the axons of the different cell types in our brain that also generate what we call today a sodium spike.
I will tell you in a second why it's a sodium spike.
Okay, so we came to the point where we now want to go into the Hodgkin and Huxley model.
So before I just show you the description of the spike how does it look like, it appears, it disappears it has a threshold, it is an all-or-none phenomenon.
But now how do you measure the underlying membrane mechanism that enabled the spikes to be generated?
So that's the beautiful trick that Hodgkin and Huxley were using.
They did actually use two tricks, one is called the Voltage clamp here and the other one is called the space clamp.
So their idea was to take this wire, a long wire into the axon and so the axon becomes iso-potential, because of this wire which is highly conductive there is no voltage drop between this location and this location so the whole elongated axon becomes electrically very compact because of this axial wire but also they use a voltage clamp and that's the ingenious trick that was not actually only devised by them but also by others, and the idea was to try to clamp, to determine the voltage between the two sides of the membrane, to force the two sides of the membrane to have a fixed voltage: a voltage clamp.
Why did they want to do it?
Because they want to measure what currents flow through the membrane when I clamp the membrane to a given voltage let's say, now I depolarize the membrane by 20mV from -70mV to -50mV, and fix it like this.
And then measure which are the currents that flow through the membrane when
I depolarize the membrane by 20mV
30mV, 40mV, and so forth.
So I don't allow the spike to occur anymore because I've fixed via voltage clamp the membrane voltage between the two sides of the membrane,
I don't allow it to change and in order to do it,
I need to develop a whole feedback system, so whenever the spike, wants to start to be initiated,
I block it, I do no allow it because I want to fix the voltage by injecting a negative current into the membrane to really balance the voltage into my voltage clamp pre-determined value.
So I control the spike, so to speak by fixing the voltage between the two sides of the membrane by injecting negative currents through my feedback system.
And then I can really measure what current I should inject in order to fix the voltage between the two sides of the membrane to be fixed.
And that's the voltage clamp idea.
It enables to uncover the ion currents that flow behind below the spike, so to speak.
So I've explained to you what is the space clamp and I've explained to you what is the voltage clamp and I've told you that this electric feedback system enables to control the voltage very rapidly so the voltage between the two sides of the membrane will be fixed.
What did they find using this technique?
So here's what they found:
They found that, when you voltage clamp the membrane above a certain level, so here they started at -60mV and they jump to 0mV so this is a 60mV depolarization and using their feedback system record which are the underlying currents during this voltage step, voltage clamp, they see something interesting.
There is a very fast early inward current and a late outward current.
So they fixed the voltage, they don't change it anymore so it's a fixed voltage clamp and they measure the current that needs to be injected in order to keep the voltage clamp fixed and they see that in the membrane, while doing this voltage clamp there is first an inward current, and when I say inward I mean flowing form the outside into the inside of the cell, later they found out that this is carried by sodium channels and if you wait enough time the current, instead of flowing into the membrane into the cell, it flows outside and this is the outward current which is carried by potassium channels or potassium current.
So this was a very interesting finding that during voltage clamp and later of course I will show that it's also during the spike itself when you reach the threshold very early on, after you reach the threshold there is an opening of sodium ion channels that are open because you reach a voltage threshold so these ion channels are voltage dependent ion channels we'll talk about this in a second because you reach this voltage threshold very early on, there is an inward current of sodium flowing from the outside to the inside, making the inside even more positive during the spike and a little bit later on, a few milliseconds later on you see an outward current, meaning that the potassium channels are open carrying current from inside to outside.
Ok?
So there are these two separate currents that underlay voltage change in the giant squid axon.
The early current which starts and then then ends so it activates and inactivates it activates and then inactivates very fast and early, and then later on there is a current that is activated, the potassium current is activated and it lasts as long as there is a voltage clamp.
So we call the early current we know now that the early current is sodium-transient activated and inactivated during the voltage clamp, and the later current that activates later and remains open remains flowing this potassium current remains flowing from inside to the outside of the membrane during the voltage clamp.
So these are the two basic currents that Hodgkin and Huxley found that underlie the generation of the spike in the membrane of the squid giant axon.
What did they do next?
What did they do next?
Next they did voltage clamp to different levels.
Here is an example of voltage clamps to different levels.
So from -60 to -40 from -60 to -20, and so forth so they clamped the membrane to different levels and they measured these two currents that I've mentioned before.
The early sodium current now reversed just for the purpose of showing it but it should have been inward, it should've been in this direction in this direction so this is the early inward current that is carried by sodium and this is the late current, the potassium current that is late relative to the early one, during voltage clamp.
So this is what
Hodgkin and Huxley did they tried to decipher, to analyze separately mathematically how to describe the early current and how to describe the late current the potassium current mathematically.
Because they had all these measurements they could fit mathematical equations for each one of these currents.
The important thing to know here, and you already can see it here is that the currents themselves, both potassium and sodium are both voltage dependent, because you can see if I change the voltage
I get different currents, but it's also time dependent as we said before.
The first one is this sodium, and it's very important that the first early current in voltage clamp is the sodium current going inward, and this also changes in time as you get more depolarization.
So it's for small depolarization, you get a slower inward current of sodium for a larger depolarization, you'll get a faster sodium current and also a bigger sodium current.
So these are currents that are both voltage and time dependent.
So in principle, I should be able and that's what Hodgkin and Huxley tried to do.
To describe the conductance of, let's say, the potassium as a function of time and of membrane voltage.
Similar to the sodium channels.
So this is the sodium conductance but this conductance depends both on time and on voltage.
So I should tell you now, without going into the details that we know today that in the axons there are these marvelous, unique absolutely unique ion channels that carry potassium and sodium as we discussed before, but in this case these ion channels that are in the axons are sensitive to voltage
They are voltage dependent.
So what makes these channels open and close is voltage.
They are sensitive to voltage.
These are voltage dependent ion channels.
That's why I wrote that the conductance here of the sodium is voltage dependent.
It also takes time for this conductance to open so it's also time dependent.
So these are very unique channels they are mostly embedded in the membrane of the axon so the axon is absolutely decorated very densely with voltage dependance ion channels both for potassium and sodium and these channels are the channels that enable the generation of the spike as I will show you in a second.
So, let's continue with the Hodgkin and Huxley discovery.
So first of all,
Hodgkin and Huxley drew this circuit.
Here's the Hodgkin and Huxley circuit of the squid giant axon membrane and as you can see here, there are these sodium channels that are voltage and time dependent, there are potassium conductances that are voltage and time dependent, and there is this thing that we call Leak conductance which is the conductance that is not voltage dependent these are what we sometimes call "the passive conductance" these are all other ion channels, sodium, potassium, and chloride that do not depend on voltage.
So these are the two channels, the potassium and the sodium that are voltage dependent that underlie the generation of the spike.
And here you see the membrane capacitance which are, as I said, all the other things that are not channels, which can accumulate ions inside and outside of the membrane.
By the way, in this case they drew the case upside down so this is the inside, so this is the negative part of the neuron and this is the outside which they connected to ground.
And this is the total of the
Hodgkin and Huxley equation here, so the current that flows through the membrane through this piece of model membrane here is a sum of the capacitative current so we didn't go into it, but the capacitative current is always the capacitant C multiplied by derivative with time dV/dt of the voltage across the membrane so this is the voltage across the membrane V as we discussed before.
So this is a voltage equation here and it's actually currents, so the total membrane current here is the sum of the capacitance current the capacitance plus the sodium current I_Na you already saw equation, but in this case you have this sodium conductance which is voltage and time dependent.
It's an excitable channel, it's a voltage dependent channel similarly to the potassium current and also the leak one, but here it's a mistake, you see the leak voltage is independent, so this is I_Leak.
So this is the total current that flows through the membrane during the spike.
The question is, can we use the clamp and the measurements they did of the dependence of membrane currents on voltage, to now describe the generation of the spike, because remember the spike itself is a voltage change it's not a voltage clamp, because it changes from time to time, changes, changes, and then goes down but for each voltage, we know from the voltage clamp what are the supposingly currents both potassium and sodium, they go through the membrane in this voltage, and then in this voltage so the voltage clam was a tool to study the dependence of this current on voltage and then use it to try to mathematically describe the transient behavior of the spike using what we learned from the voltage clamp.
Of course, as they succeeded, otherwise they wouldn't get the Nobel prize, because they did a wonderful work in transforming from what they learned form the voltage clamp into describing the spike.
So here it is.
This is one example of a voltage clamp experiment and a mathematical attempt to capture the current that they measure, so the continuous line here this line is the theoretical line and these dots are the experimental dots measured by Hodgkin and Huxley for this particular step and then they used this equation to try to describe, in this case the conductance of the potassium.
So this is the conductance of the potassium.
They say that they can fit very well this particular experimental result by describing the conductance, so this is again a function of T and V yes by maximal conductance, so this is a total conductance of potassium in a piece of membrane if everything would've openned, you would get this total conductance of the potassium multiplied by some parameter which they call "n" the activation variable.
And this "n" is a parameter. that in some sense it tells you which proportions, what is the proportion of the ions available, potassium ions available in the membrane that are open.
So "n" goes from 0 to 1.
So if it's zero there is no conductance for potassium, everything is closed and it's one, it's the maximal all the channels are open.
So that's how
Hodgkin and Huxley thought about the potassium channels, and they realized that this "n" this "n" parameter as I said, it also depends on voltage and on time.
So this probability, or this parameter between zero and one, that can be thought of as probability, this probability to be open, the channel probability to be open depends on voltage, so the more voltage depolarization you have the more probability that the channel will be open, but it will also take some time for this channel to open and this time dependence is also voltage dependence.
Ok, so that's the channel.
Here is the complete equation of Hodgkin and Huxley you just saw this one.
And now they describe this parameter "n" here by two extra additional parameters
αn and βn these are the rate constances by which the channel opens or closes.
So this is the closed state of the channel and this is the rate by which the closed state of the channel tends to open, and βn is the rate by which the open state of the channel tends to close.
So that's how they describe this activation function "n" for the potassium to depend on these rate functions of the channel, like a chemical reaction either to go towards the closed state of the channel or to go towards the open state of the channel and this is the description of this channel and beta and alpha are both voltage dependent.
So this is voltage dependent, and this is voltage independent and eventually "n", of course, is both time and voltage dependent.
So that's the Hodgkin and Huxley equation for the potassium channel.
It has a conductance, the conductance depends on this activation variable "n", and this activation variable n"" depends on the activation rate of making the closed channel open
Alpha "n", and the activation rate, activation function in units of 1 over time, of making the open channel close.
And as I said, the α and the β are both only voltage dependent.
"n" is both time and voltage dependent.
And now they try to fit this whole equation, this hole experimental behavior, so this is the continuous line here they are trying to do a good mathematical approximation and they found these two equations both for α as a function of V, and for β as a function of V.
These two particular equation without getting into the details of why they choose this particularity equation they had the intuition of how this equation should look like and they fit the numbers here and here, and so on and they get a wonderful fit as you see here between the experimental results and the theoretical curve.
So this is sketchuring... these equations now capture the behavior of the potassium current or the potassium conductance.
They did the same thing for the sodium the sodium is more complicated, here is a voltage clamp experiment so they clamp it to this voltage, and to a bigger voltage and to a larger voltage, and so forth and they got this set of curves and now they are trying to do the exact same procedure, like they do for the potassium separately for sodium.
This is more complicated, because as discussed before the sodium first activates and then inactivates
The sodium first activates and then, although you continue to hold the voltage clamp, it goes down.
So there are two stages, separate stages to the sodium channel.
It activates during the polarization but at the same time it also starts to inactivate.
So that's what makes the equation more difficult.
So there is this "m" variable, which behaves like the "n" variable but the activation of the sodium channels and this "h" variable is for the inactivation of the sodium channels, but in principal they are absolutely same equations with alpha "m" and beta "m", and alpha "h" and beta "h" very similar, each one has it's own prototypical equation for the description and here they are for the α "m" and for the β "m" so this is the activation of the sodium channel. and this is for the inactivation .
So again this is an attempt by Hodgkin and Huxley to fit these continuous lines here continuous line here are the fit to the experimental dots using these equations.
Ok, so they use the voltage clamp in order to get these equations and now they are trying to simulate mathematically all three equations, actually more than three equations because you have for alpha and beta, and so forth the set of equations together in order to try to see whether they can replicate mathematically, capture the full action potential.
And here is the result.
This is now the circuit that I mentioned before of all the channels involved.
These are actually the four basic Hodgkin and Huxley equations this is the current equation depending on the capacitance current the sodium current, the potassium current and the Leak current, and these are three more equations for the activation of the "m" of the sodium activation, the activation of the potassium "n" and the inactivation of the sodium "h".
So these are the four basic
Hodgkin and Huxley equations and now you know we also have equations for the alphas and the betas for each one of them separately using all of these four equations plus the equations for alpha and beta in a rather old primitive computer, compared to what we have today, they succeeded to get the full action potential.
Here's the first time you see a simulated action potential.
So this is the voltage, the solution for this equation that I showed you before is the solution for the voltage.
So here is the voltage solved by the Hodgkin and Huxley equation and you see that the voltage behaves very similarly to an action potential.
It grows and then it goes down even bellow the resting potential, and then it terminates.
But of course they could also see the underlying mechanism because they had a model, for example you can see that the conductance of the sodium is the early conductance is the one that initiates the action potential.
Why?
Because very early on when the action potential starts growing if you depolarize the membrane enough this depolarization very early on opens sodium channels sodium starts flowing into the cell and then charges the inside of the cell with positive charge, so the inside of the cell becomes more positive and then more sodium channels are open more sodium channels are now carrying sodium charge into the cell and the cell becomes more and more positive inside and this is the blowing of the spike.
But later on, the potassium channels start to open and potassium channels are later, but they start to open this now means that the potassium escapes from inside to the outside due to this gradience potassium leaves the inside of the cell the potassium ion channels, and this makes the inside more negative, more negative meaning that you end the action potential and here even more negative because here there is a lot of conductance for potassium here and the sodium almost ended so now the potassium carries membrane potential bellow rest towards the Nernst battery of the potassium and then potassium closes a little bit slowly and then ends the complete phenomenon.
So you'll now realize that the action potential which actually looks very similar to the biological action potential by Hodgkin and Huxley equations, is a really good description of the biological phenomenon that we call spike or action potential.
So, let me summarize this part.
So as I sad, the Hodgkin and Huxley is really a marvelous success of taking biological measurements, many years of biological measurements of what ions are involved involved changing the concentration in sodium and potassium, but eventually coming to an equation, a set of four equations, with some extra equation to describe the rate constance, Alpha and Beta, and then you get a wonderful description of this phenomenon that is called the spike.
We know that the spike is carried by two ions, two main ions potassium and sodium and that's the main thing depend on voltage, so these two ions, the capability of two ions to flow through the membrane, depends on particular channels in the membrane.
Hodgkin and Huxley used to call them gates these are gates that are opening and closing the membrane and these gates are themselves voltage dependent.
So you have a phenomenon that is a voltage phenomenon the spike, but the voltage of the spike itself open the channels, first early channels the sodium channels, which make the spike itself grow because the spike in the beginning insert more and more sodium channels into the axon and more and more of these sodium channels make the inside more and more positive until it blows regeneratively, we call it but then later on the potassium comes in and the voltage opens the potassium channels in the membrane.
These potassium channels enable potassium to flow from the inside to the outside, leaving negative traces inside and these negative traces inside make the spike go off, shut off, turn off.
So this interplay between the fast inward inactivating  sodium, and the late outward activated potassium is really the underlying mechanism of this fantastic phenomenon, the spike.
So the capability of spike to occur in the axon critically and totally depend on the existence of specific ion channels in the axons that are themselves sensitive to voltage.
They are voltage dependent, or what we call "excitable channels" and this excitability of the channels enables the spikes to regenerate itself and blow itself up and then close itself due to the potassium.
So that's what I wanted to say about the Hodgkin and Huxley equations.
Now, of course, we have fast computers which I hope you will use your own computer can simulate the Hodgkin and Huxley equation very fast, Hodgkin and Huxley worked very hard to solve the equation numerically, but they eventually succeeded and they got something very nice comparable to what they measured experimentally.
Before ending this part,
I want to say two things.
First of all, as I said when solving the four equations
Hodgkin and Huxley succeeded to replicate the experimental spike but not only replicate, and that's a very important point that I want to make here about a good model.
A good model is not only a replica, of what you already put inside.
A good model, which is very useful for biologists, for example is a model that gives prediction.
And one of the main predictions of Hodgkin and Huxley is that after the spike, following the spike there is a period where you cannot get a second spike.
It's called a refractory period.
This was not a part of the initial model but it was explained by the Hodgkin and Huxley model, so it's a prediction by a Hodgkin and Huxley model, we know experimentally that when you stimulate the axon and very early on you stimulate again another axon, it won't generate a second spike.
So there is a period, whereby we cannot get a second spike.
It's a very important period, the refractory period because it sets the frequency of spikes that the axon can generate.
One spike, and then stop, no spike, no matter what you do and then a second spike.
It's called the refractory period, let's say every 10ms you can get a spike, this means hundred spikes per second, hundred hertz.
So the Hodgkin and Huxley model prejudiced and explained the phenomenon of the refractory period.
In the same 1952-D paper also predicted the velocity of the spike, which is not a part of this local model.
The velocity of the spike depends on the length of the axon the width of the axon they predicted the velocity of the spike in the squid giant axon, in their mathematical equation and it was really, indeed the same velocity measured experimentally.
So this is a very powerful model because it doesn't only replicate the experimental result, but it explained other results that were not part of the original model.
And finally, I want to say something very important which I already highlighted or mentioned before is that the Hodgkin and Huxley model is a universal model in the sense that, no matter what cell you take let's say, now I take for you this cell, which is a pyramidal cell reconstructed from the cortex, actually human cell, human pyramidal cell, you saw before, and this is the axon of this human pyramidal cell, or this is a piece of an axon
And you can see that, if you measure in this particular cell if you measure in this particular cell the spiking activity, you get the spikes.
These are the experimental spikes, these are the brown spikes.
One spike, another spike, another spike.
These are the experimental spikes.
But now if you model the spikes using the extension of Hodgkin and Huxley and when I say extension of Hodgkin and Huxley,
I mean that the same formalism exactly the same formalism but adding additional currents still carried by sodium, potassium, or calcium but with different kinetics, so different Alphas and different Betas for different channels, we know that there are slow potassium channels, even slower then in in the Hodgkin and Huxley case there are ion channels in the membrane that are sensitive to calcium, so the channels not only depend on voltage but also on calcium, and so forth, but it's the same formalism, and when you extend the Hodgkin and Huxley formalism, you can get the firing patterns essentially of every cell in the brain.
This is just one example, the green model succeeds to replicate the firing of this particular cell which is a cortical cell, nothing to do with the squid giant axon, but still fires spikes and spikes and spikes, but the pattern of activity depends on these extra channels, not only the generation of the single spike but when will the next spike arrive, and the next spike arrive depends on these other channels with the same
Hodgkin and Huxley formalism.
So it's a wonderful model because it not only captures the spike in the squid giant axon, it captured the whole universal phenomenon of a spike in any cell and that's why we, in many ways really adore Hodgkin and Huxley, because they gave us the tool to simulate one of the two most important signals in the brain, electrical signals : the spike.
The next thing we shall do, we'll go to the synaptic potential.
