When we want to start connecting cells we also need chemical synapses.
In NEURON a synapse is represented as a point process.
Such processes are located at specific locations along the morphology and they will, in general, inject some current into the cell when activated.
NEURON have several build-in synapse types.
In this tutorial we will use the "ExpSyn" Synapse.
This is a synapse with a single exponential decay of its conductance.
The equations to calculate the current generated by this synapse are basically the total current is governed by this equation and the conductance that is used in this equation has its own differential equation, which basically shows the exponential decay of the synapse.
Every time an event arrives at the synapse the conductance is increased by its weight.
Now, let's add such a synapse to the dendrite.
To stimulate this synapse, we have to create a "netstim" object.
It basically plays the role of a pre-synaptic cell.
The attributes of this object specify how many times we want to stimulate the synapse with each interval and when we want to start.
The noise attribute determines the stochasticity of the process.
Zero means a completely regular firing of the "netstim" object.
This "netstim" needs to be connected to the cell.
A "netcon" object acts as a connector between the pre-synaptic and the post-synaptic cell.
So we basically connect the "netstim" with "expsyn" on the post-synaptic cell.
And now we can run the simulation.
As you can see there are five events arriving in the post-synaptic cell.
Each event injects a certain current in the cell and slowly decays afterwards.
In our last example we will connect two cells together.
We make a pre-synaptic cell, and inject a current clamp into it so that it spikes.
By connecting this cell to a post-synaptic cell that doesn't receive a current clamp we can make the second cell fire also.
So we basically use the cell that we have created in this entire tutorial as a post-synaptic cell and we create a new pre-synaptic cell with the suffix P that has a current injected also record a current from it, and we also create a "netcon" that connects our pre-synaptic cell to our synapse in the post-synaptic cell.
As we can see, we have the pre-synaptic cell firing and the post-synaptic cell fires with a small delay.
