Welcome to this introductory course on astrophysics.
In this first video, we will become more familiar
with the astronomical objects in the Universe
and we will introduce the distance and mass scales
needed to characterize them.
Let's first introduce the distance scales.
First of all, in the solar system, we often use the astronomical unit
which is the distance between the Earth and the Sun (1 AU - UA on the slides).
This distance is 149 millions km,
that is the distance between the Earth and the Sun.
If we are interested in bigger distances,
we will often measure them in lightyears (ly - al on the slides)
which is the distance travelled by light during one year,
at the speed of 300.000 km/s.
This corresponds to a distance of 9,46 times 10^12 km.
Most of the time, we will use another distance, called the parsec
Most of the time, we will use another distance, called the parsec
that we will define in the following.
It turns out that this distance, numerically speaking,
is equals to 3,26 lightyears.
To define the parsec, we first have to define
what is called the parallax.
Parallax is the angle subtended by Earth's radius at a distance d,
for example at the distance of this star.
Here is the line of sight to the star seen from the Earth at a certain time.
The star will be at a particular apparent location on the sky.
Six months later for example, the parallax of this star will be different:
the star will be observed at another location on the sky.
The angle variation between the two positions is called the parallax.
So, the parallax is an angle theta which depends
on Earth's orbital radius and on the distance to the star.
During the year, what we will see on the sky
is the star following small ellipses
whose opening angle is equal to this parallax.
The parallax is simply theta = r/d
We can now express things in astronomical units.
If r is equal to one astronomical unit
and if theta equals one arcsecond, then we can write a very simple equation :
1 = 1/d. This obviously implies
that d is also equal to 1. This 1 has the unit of a parsec,
which is the abbreviation of the parallax of one arcsecond
In other words, if we express distances in astronomical units
and parallaxes in arcseconds
then we can rewrite that the angle theta in arcseconds
is equal to 1 over the distance in parsec.
That is, a parsec is the distance at which one astronomical unit
subtends an angle of one arcsecond.
Those are the main units of distances in astrophysics.
Astronomical units are used for distances
of the order of the size of a planetary system
like our solar system. Otherwise, we use lightyears or parsecs.
We have a direct relation between distances in parsec and angles
subtended by objects in the sky.
Now let's define some units of mass.
For example in the solar system, you have here the planet Saturn
observed at different times.
In our solar system, we have eight planets
we can express their masses either in Earth masses
for telluric planets, that is with a solid crust,
or in Jupiter masses for gaseous planets.
The symbol used for Earth is a circle with a cross in its centre.
The Earth's mass is equals to 5,97 times 10^24 kg.
Earth's radius is 6371 km. We will often express planetary masses
and planetary radii in units of Earth masses
and Earth radii.
If we are interested in bigger planets, we can compare
for example Jupiter mass, which is 317.8 times the Earth mass,
and the radius of which equals 11 times Earth radius
In addition to the eight planets of the solar system, we currently know
1700 exoplanets or extra-solar planets.
The first extra-solar planet was discovered in 1995 by Michel Mayor
and Didier Queloz at the Observatory of Geneva.
This one was an indirect detection,measured
thanks to the radial velocity of the star around which it orbits.
The first direct detection was made in 2008.
In the solar system, we don't only find planets.
There are also comets for example
which are sort of frozen mudballs
that evaporate as they get close to the Sun. The matter ejected by the comet,
by its nucleus, is pushed by solar photons
along large cometary tails.
So, comets have a nucleus.
The nucleus is often very small, with a diameter
of the order of 5 to 10 km, with a maximum around 100 km.
They also have a halo. Its diameter is of the order of 50'000 km
to 250 000 km.
Cometary dust is ejected to form tails.
For example, we see here a dust tail, made of quite heavy particles
and here a tail made of ionised matter, namely ions.
Light particles are over there, and heavier dusts
are generally ejected on another tail.
What is the composition of a comet?
They are mainly composed
of organic matter, C, H, O N and actually contain 80% of water.
and around 10% of carbon monoxide.
Such cometary tails can reach a size of
the order of 60 to 100 millions km.
We have then sizes of the order of the astronomical unit.
Let's resume our tour of the solar system.
The solar system contains of course the Sun, our reference star.
Note that it is the only star we know that we can directly
observe the surface, that we can take pictures of.
All other stars are way too small and too far
for us to directly study their surface.
The surface temperature of the Sun is 5'700 K
This is the mass of the Sun, that will be used as a reference
for the mass of other astronomical bodies.
We will generally express the masses of galaxies
and large astrophysical objects in terms of solar masses.
This solar mass is 10³³ grams.
Here is the solar radius, that will also be used to characterise
the radii of other stars for example.
Its value is  695'000 km, which is roughly 109 times Earth's radius
Other stars are similar to the Sun.
They are powered by
two phenomenon : gravitational compression, and nuclear fusion
of hydrogen atoms into helium.
We usually define the lifetime of a star
as the time it takes to burn all its hydrogen into helium.
This amount of time is the main part of a star's lifespan.
The other extremely important parameter for stars is their masses.
Star masses can range from
0.06 times the mass of the Sun up to 60 solar masses.
Under 0.06 solar masses,
nuclear fusion reactions cannot ignite.
Beyond very large masses such as 60 to 100 solar masses,
the star will collapse and thus disappear.
Stars radii, that we will compare to Sun's radius
will range typically from 0.17 (0.2) solar radii
up to approximately 15 times solar radii.
This is the whole range of radii we can observe on stars.
As for temperatures, the Sun
has a surface temperature of 5'780 K.
The coldest stars can have temperatures of the order of 2'640 K
and the hottest ones around 44'500 K.
The lifetime is, as mentionned before, the time needed to burn
hydrogen into helium.
This time varies on a very wide range, that can go from
5 times 10^6, a few million years,
up to 10^13 years.
A star can then last longer
than the current age of the universe, 13,7 billion years.
Stars luminosity will again be compared to the Sun's.
Typically, the luminosity can vary
between 1,2 times 10^-3 solar luminosity,
1000 times less luminous than the Sun, and up to stars as bright
as 8 times 10^5 solar luminosity.
Most stars are in mass, radius, temperature, lifetime
and luminosity ranges that are written here.
Stars do not have an infinite lifespan.
Once they burn all their hydrogen into helium,
there are two possible scenarios for the death of a star.
Either the initial mass of the star is bigger than 8 times the Sun's mass,
and we have a supernova, a very powerful explosion of the star,
or the mass is lower than 8 times the mass of the Sun,
and we have what is called a planetary nebula.
Unlike what the name suggests, a planetary nebula
as nothing to do with planets. Here is one of them,
nebula Messier 57 in the constellation of Lyra.
Planetary nebulae are due to the expansion of
the outer layers of the star and the collapse of internal layers.
At the end of the process subsists at the center
what is called a white dwarf, surrounded by the star remnants.
It is the white dwarf that will ionize the gas all around the nebula.
In the external layers here, we recognize radiating hydrogen
with red spectral lines.
And in this part in green is the radiation of oxygen.
Here is the expansion velocity of the nebula,
which grows as the gas expands all around it.
The expansion speed is of the order of 20 to 30 km/s.
In a supernova, the speed of the external layers
much later after the explosion is of the order of 2000 - 3000 km/s.
The matter ejected by stars at their death, either
by a supernova or in the form of a planetary nebula,
will be recycled into new stars.
Here is the example of Great Orion Nebula (Messier 42)
which has in its centre a cluster of young stars forming
from the gas of the nebula.
There are a lot of things in such picture.
There is ionized gas, the density of which is around 1 particle /cm³,
that is a mass density of 10^-21 kg/m³.
Here the gas looks quite dense, but we actually see the nebula from far away.
and the density is in reality lower than in the ultra high vacuum
we can produce on Earth.
This concerns the gas that will emit a spectral line radiation
at different wavelengths, which is generally produced
by a hot source, such as a cluster of young stars,
namely stars forming from the matter ejected by
the death of other stars. We will also find cosmic dust.
Dust absorbs background light, which is why we see
all these dark stripes
here or there. These are areas filled with dust.
This dust is composed of grains bigger than the gas,
itself composed of atoms. Dust grains are actually
similar to the dust left by a chalk on a blackboard for example.
This dust has a density even smaller
than the gas, for example 10^-13 particles /cm³,
which is 13 orders of magnitude smaller than the gas density.
The mass density is 10^-23 kg/m³.
We can of course imagine a situation
where all the gas has been recycled into stars.
It is usually the case in what we call open clusters.
For example we see here in NGC 4755 a variety
of young stars, here and there.
All the blue stars in this cluster are at the same distance from us.
The stars in the cluster have approximately the same age.
The stars in this open cluster are very young, with an age
around 10^8 years,
which is small in comparison to the age of the universe, around 13.7 billion years.
The size of such a cluster is around 10 parsec.
It is also the size of the nebulae who give birth to such clusters.
In a galaxy like our Milky Way,
we find young stellar clusters, open clusters or non-open clusters
as well as globular clusters, such as this one here.
A globular cluster is much more massive
than an open cluster.
The typical mass of an open cluster ranges from a few hundreds
to a few thousands solar masses.
The mass of a globular cluster is of the order of 10^6 solar masses.
The mass of a globular cluster is of the order of 10^6 solar masses.
Globular clusters are relatively old star clusters.
The age of the stars is of the order of 10^9 up to 10^10 years.
Such clusters can be found in the periphery of galaxies.
They are bigger than open clusters, with typical
diameters of 40 to 50 parsecs.
Stars, planets, nebulae, star clusters are all
elements of galaxies
A galaxy is a much bigger object than everything we've seen
so far. Here you have a spiral galaxy
like our Milky Way, which is named after its spiral structure
that you see in a disk with a bulge in its centre.
So here is the bulge, and here is the disk.
Old stars are in the centre, while young stars are
usually formed in the arms.
What we don't see in this picture is a halo
of dark matter all around, in which are also the globular clusters.
At the scale of this picture, the previously seen globular
cluster is completely invisible.
If it was visible, it would appear as a tiny dot, just like these.
As for the diameter of a galaxy, you remember stellar clusters
have sizes of 10, 40, 50 parsecs.
have sizes of 10, 40, 50 parsecs.
Here we have galactic disks
with a diameter of 30 to 40 kiloparsecs.
The mass of a spiral galaxy is of the order of
10^9 up to 10^12 solar masses.
Here is another example of a spiral galaxy.
As mentionned before, in a spiral galaxy you have a bulge, here,
and a disk that you see now here edge-on.
This is the spiral galaxy NGC 891 seen edge-on.
What you see here
is a halo around the bulge, composed of old stars.
Here are the spiral arms seen from the side, composed of young stars
and of dust absorbing the background light,
just like we saw earlier on with the nebula Messier 42,
the Great Orion Nebula, that was showed
as an example of diffuse nebula.
In the disk you have
dust and young stars.
The Milky Way looks like that. Obviously we can't
see our own galaxy from outside, but if we could
see the Milky Way from outside,
we would place the Sun here, at 2/3 of the distance between
the centre and the exterior of the galaxy.
Again, the whole system is surrounded by a halo of
dark matter, that by definition does not emit any light.
Spiral galaxies are one kind of galaxy.
There are also elliptical galaxies, which as their name suggest
have an elliptical shape. They are often at the centre of galaxy clusters.
This is why you see here other galaxies around it.
All these galaxies are at the same distance from us
and the central galaxy is an elliptical one, which is actually
a sort of ball of old stars with random orbits
around a centre of gravity.
Contrarly to spiral galaxies, they contain
little or no dust.
They also contain little or no gas and form only a few stars.
Their masses covers a much wider range
than spiral galaxies, between
10^7 and 10^13 solar masses.
They are generally encountered at the centre of clusters of galaxies.
This is a cluster of galaxies.
At the centre of a galaxy cluster, we usually find
a main elliptical galaxy, as we can see here.
We actually see a lot of elliptical galaxies,
even quite far from the centre.
There are also spiral galaxies, and virtually all types of galaxies.
They all orbit around a common centre of gravity.
Galaxy clusters are the heaviest gravitationally bound
structures in the universe.
They obviously contain visible matter, but are also surrounded by
a halo of dark matter, just like individual galaxies,
spiral galaxies, elliptical galaxies.
The masses involved are really huge,
between 10^14 to 10^15 solar masses.
All the astronomical objects that we just saw,
from the smallest to the largest, the lightest to the heaviest,
are part of a whole, the universe, the study of which is called cosmology.
In the picture behind me is an overview of the whole universe
in a single picture. This is the Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
a picture taken by the Hubble space telescope
that simultaneously shows in a single shot 10'000 galaxies, illustrating
the diversity of the worlds surrounding us.
It is by studying such pictures in details, at different wavelengths,
different resolutions and perhaps at different eras
that we can trace down the history of the galaxies formation,
stars, planets, ..., in short, the whole universe.
Two essential tools to study the trajectories of astrophysical objects
and measure their masses are the three Kepler's laws
and the Virial theorem.
These will be the topic of the next videos.
