We present here four videos with numerical simulations
illustrating the time evolution
of an isolated self-gravitating system of particles,
in other words only influenced by its own gravitational force.
In the following simulations
we used a limited number of particles :
8000 particles, shown
in the upper part of the simulation, with an enlargement
in the right part of the simulation.
At each instant between each video frame,
all the gravitational forces between the particles are computed
in order to predict at each time the position and the velocity of each particle
and to let evolve with time several quantities
such as
the virial, the kinetic energy, the potential energy and the total energy.
Lets evolve the system over time.
In each following footage,
the initial positions of all the particles are strictly the sames.
Only the velocities, that is the kinetic energy, changes.
In each simulation we show in the bottom part of the video
the kinetic energy in green,
the potential energy in red
and their sum, the total energy in white.
As for the virial, i.e., twice the kinetic energy
plus the potential energy, it is shown in blue.
We first see that in such a system, completely isolated,
that the total energy is always exactly conserved
up to numerical errors, up to the accuracy of the simulation.
The potential energy plus twice the kinetic energy,
namely the virial,
oscillates indeed around 0 over time.
Lets see what happens now if the system is not isolated anymore ?
We introduce an external perturbation to the system
which affects the shape of the self-gravitating system,
which actually isn't self-graviting anymore,
and affects the physical quantities we measure.
The physical quantities are in the lower part
and the system still in the upper part.
We see that under the effect of an external perturbation
the system deforms over time
and we also see that the total energy increases.
The virial does not oscillate around zero anymore
but also tends to increase.
In this specific case
we tend to add up kinetic energy to the system
through the external perturbation.
Now let us go back to an isolated system,
that is without external gravitational field anymore.
We will set initial conditions
such that the kinetic energy is too low to counterbalance the potential energy.
In such a case,
the total energy is of course conserved over time
since the system is isolated.
What happens is that the system has to contract
to make a sudden increase of the kinetic energy
at the beginning of the simulation.
In order to gain kinetic energy, we lose potential energy,
and to lose potential energy the system contracts
until reaching an equilibrium after a some time
where the virial oscillates around zero.
The system was initially too big for its kinetic energy and
as such contracted itself to reach a new equilibrium.
In a similar way, if we take an isolated system
but this time with too much kinetic energy
in regards to potential energy
then the kinetic and potential energies
will balance each other
as seen here.
The kinetic energy decreases over time,
the potential energy increases over time,
the total energy is conserved
since the system is isolated
and the virial will naturally converge to a mean value of zero
after a some time.
As opposed to the previous simulation,
the system will grow in size contrary to the contraction observed previously.
The numerical simulations shown here
only use a limited number of particles
yet enough to illustrate the time evolution
of a self-graviting system.
However, they only take into account the gravitational forces between the particles.
Other numerical simulations can be used
to understand the formation and evolution of galaxies.
They can include up to hundreds of billions of particles
as well as the physics of gas surrounding the particles
and the explosion of supernovae.
In the simulation you see behind me,
we used ten million particles
to model the evolution of a spiral galaxy
over several hundreds of millions of years.
