The main source, or even the only source of information
coming from space are the photons.
Their energy distribution, meaning their colour,
and their quantity, which is their spectral distribution
shown here in the optical domain from blue to red,
inform us on the physical processes responsible for the emission
and absorption of the radiation, therefore of the photons,
but also on the physical properties of the environment, namely the matter
with which the radiation will interact.
As we have just mentioned, light is extremly important
in astrophysics, because light carries energy as a wave
or as a particle.
This is the wave-particle duality.
The photons will convey a certain amount of energy
which will be quantified.
This energy is proportional to the frequency of the photon.
And the proportionality constant, which is the Planck constant,
has the units of an angular momentum.
So in quantum physics, it's the angular momentum that is quantified
and thus also the energy of the photons.
Obviously the frequency is related, as always, to the wavelength
through the speed of light and the period of oscillation of the wave
which is 1 divided by the frequency.
The energy is measured per unit of time, so it is actually a power.
If a star radiates a certain luminosity L,
the brightness will be measured for example in ergs per second,
an energy unit divided by a time unit,
and that brightness, which we will have here, will be captured
at a certain distance from the Earth,
here, at a distance d.
And we will capture it on a certain surface,
so we have here the isotropic radiation of a star with total luminosity L.
This radiation will be diluted on a sphere of surface
4 π times the distance squared.
In the end, what we will receive on the ground,
is a certain flux of photons, a certain flux of energy,
which will be the original luminosity L of the star divided by 4 π d²
That is what we find here.
We have the luminosity, namely the energy, actually the power
- energy divided by time - that will be distributed isotropically,
on the surface of the sphere which is here, and we only receive
a small part of the whole radiation.
We will also observe at certain specific wavelengths
or frequencies.
So to go from the expression of a flux in wavelength units
to a flux in frequency units,
it isn't enough to replace λ by ν.
Regardless of the way one measures the available energy
in wavelength units or in frequency units
one has to have the same result.
If I multiply the flux by a wavelength unit
or the flux expressed in frequency units by a certain interval of frequencies
I need to obtain the same result, in absolute values,
since λ and ν vary inversely.
Now, we said that λ = c / ν.
This implies that if I take the differential we have dλ = - (c /ν²) x dν.
If we replace dλ here, we obtain immediately that fν = (c / ν² )x fλ.
So the relation between the flux expressed in frequency units
and the flux expressed in wavelength units
is not totally obvious.
There is a slight distortion between the two scales.
Photons do not only carry energy: note that energy
can be expressed in different ways for the photons.
It can be written as E = hν,
but can also be written as the quadratic sum of p x c + mc²
with the famous mass energy.
Now for photons, there is no mass energy
but they still have a momentum.
Therefore we can write that E = p times c where p is the momentum.
Of course, one can reverse the equation and get p = E/c = hν (for the photons) /c
Now what will happen, is that each time one has for example,
a particle of matter or a dust particle,
a photon can be absorbed
During the absorption, all the momentum of the photon,
- because a photon is always entirely absorbed or emitted -
all the momentum of the photon will be transfered here
to the particle or dust-particle.
So, during the transfer, the dp/dt of the particle is just hν/c.
the whole momentum of the photon will be transferred to the particle,
The dp/dt of the particle is a force, whose norm is hν / c.
This force is extremely important in astrophysics.
It will play a role in the wole process of star formation
through atomic or molecular cloud collapse.
This force is called radiation pressure
This force will be generated by a photon flux hitting particles,
atoms, molecules, dust particles.
We have seen that light can transport energy.
It can also transport momentum,
and transfer this momentum to matter,
therefore imprinting force on matter
Now how does the photon spectrum distribute itself in energy?
The spectrum, this energy distribution, can be discrete or continuous.
In one case, we have a radiation where all wavelengths
are present in the spectrum.
In the other case, only some wavelengths are present,
so discrete lines will form the spectrum.
In most cases, astronomical objects will show spectra
that are a combination of both types of radiation.
The physical processes at play behind these types of emission
are not the same, and this is why we can study celestial bodies.
First of all, continuous radiation: we have here a continuous spectrum.
Each photon which has been emitted from blue to red,
so here we show only the visible wavelength range,
each photon transports an energy hν, which we can also write
as a momentum,
and a wavelength which is equal to c/ν
so the wavelength and the frequency vary in opposite ways.
Here we recognise of course the blue, with the red on this side of the spectrum
the short wavelengths, so, small λ, are on this side of the spectrum
large λ.
It is the opposite for the frequencies.
Finally the most powerful phenomena...
So, more energy is transported at short wavelengths
or at  high frequencies.
And here, less energy because the wavelengths are larger
and the frequencies shorter.
The energy distribution of the photons can be continuous
or discrete.
This is the case in atomic or molecular clouds
where each photon has a well-defined energy.
For example here, we have a given photon with an energy E1 = hν1.
Here we have another photon with an energy E2 = hν2.
This type of radiation is generally present in nebulae,
atomic or molecular clouds, excited by ionisation sources,
in other words, heating of matter.
For example, stars in a nebula.
Of course, most of the time we will have
a combination of both types of radiation.
For example here, we have a continuous radiation which will superimpose itself
with a discrete radiation.
This happens when a background source is seen
through, for example a cold gaz cloud.
We will see that later on, where some wavelengths are absorbed.
So here, again we have: E1 = hν1
E2 = hν2
where ν1 and ν2 are exactly the same frequencies
as in the previous slides.
because we have the same gas with the same chemical composition,
which absorbs the background radiation.
So we can easily have a combination of continuum and line spectra
where the lines can be in emission or in absorption.
Here we show them only in absorption but we could very well
have them in emission, as in the previous slide,
in superposition with the continuous spectrum.
Here is a situation where we have a continuous spectrum
where we have a heat source, for example the sun or any other star
where we have a nuclear radiation source in the center,
which will heat up the outer layers
and the outer layers will re-emit what we call black-body radiation
at all wavelengths, in this case here
in the visible wavelength range from blue to red.
All stars will show this type of continuous radiation.
Here is now a situation where we have a line spectrum
with the monochromatic lines that we have shown earlier
at certain frequencies or certain wavelengths
We have a situation where a molecular or atomic cloud
is ionised by a source of ionisation here, for example stars.
The stars will excite the atomic gas.
We will come back to that in the following videos.
The gas will be excited by the photons emitted by the stars and, through de-excitation,
atoms will emit lines, which will be carateristic
of the chemical composition of the gas.
The line-spectra inform us of the chemical composition and
the physical conditions of the medium: a gas which was ionised,
excited by a radiation source such as stars.
We have seen before that most of the spectra
are a combination of a continuous spectrum and a line spectrum.
Here is a good example.
We have here a background source.
A hot source,
which emits a continuous spectrum.
For example a star which emits a black-body radiation spectrum.
And on the line of sight, between the background stars and us
lies for example a gas with atoms
and molecules.
This colder gas will absorb light
at well defined wavelengths which depend
on the chemical composition of the gas.
Here again we can learn things thanks to such a spectrum,
of the background source but also of the chemical composition of the gas
over the line of sight to the background source.
Here is a concrete example of a spectrum composed of a continuum
and of absorption lines,
the spectrum of a star whose name is here.
We can see here the surface temperature  : 15 000K.
Its a hot blue star whose black-body spectrum
can be seen here
and which also displays a whole series of lines.
If we zoom in on the lines here,
We can see them here, stretching the wavelength axis
we see that there are lots of lines, which here are due
to hydrogen in the stellar atmosphere.
This is for a star other then the sun.
Now let's look at what happens in the sun.
If one took a spectrum of the sun, what would one have?
Well, we have the sun with a surface temperature of 5780K.
That is our hot source.
The sun, of course, has an atmosphere.
So, the sun's surface is here, but let's tell that
the upper atmosphere of the sun is around here.
This contains hydrogen.
So we have here the situation we had before, where we had a hot source,
the sun's surface, with light
that travels to the eye and then, in between,
we have the hydrogen surface, which we have shown here.
So we have the sun's core producing radiation due to nuclear reactions
which will heat the sun's surface,
and the gas in the atmosphere of the sun will form the lines we have seen
in the spectrum shown earlier.
All stars display this kind of spectrum:
a continuum component due to the heating of their surface
from the inner nuclear reactions and at some point
absorption lines just above their surface due to hydrogen which is cooler then the surface.
That said, one can also have emission lines
next to the surface if the physical conditions
and the temperature of the star are right.
We have seen that light can be distributed into two components,
one continuous, and one discrete, i.e. the line spectrum.
Let's see in a bit more detail which physical processes can be
responsible for the continuous spectra.
As we have just seen, the sun or the stars display
a black-body spectrum.
Let's also look at two other radiation processes which will generally
take place in galaxy clusters
or in places where a magnetic field is present.
For instance, the Compton scattering or Bremsstrahlung-radiation
which will take place in ionised gases
or synchrotron radiation which takes place when
magnetic field lines are present in the interstellar medium,
intergalactic medium or around astronomical objects.
First of all, black body radiation:
it is a radiation which is created by a heat source.
Stars are excellent black bodies.
We will come back to them in the following videos
The spectrum of this black body is a Planckian curve,
which depends only on the temperature.
The position of the emission peak here,
depends only on the temperature.
Here we have a black body with a temperature of 6000K.
Here we have a black body corresponding to the temperature of the sun : 5780K
and there colder and colder stars , down to T=4500K
The colder a black body is, the more in the red its radiation peak will be.
We can already deduce, knowing only that a star has a black body radiation spectrum
and knowing that the radiation peak will move with the temperature,
that a star that radiates most of its light
in the short wavelengths, will be bluer
than a star which radiates at longer wavelengths
and with a lower temperature.
So, a hot star will appear blue
while a cold star will appear red.
The second type of continuous radiation which can be relevant,
especially when we have a hot, ionised gas,
is the Compton scattering of electrons in a proton gas,
which is actually a plasma.
This radiation is also called Bremsstrahlung radiation,
or "braking radiation" in german.
"Braking" because electrons are accelerated,
namely, they will be accelerated by ions with a charge Ze here,
and here we have an electron.
So each time an electron will move near a proton
it will be accelerated and,
when an electron moving already at high speed is accelerated ,
it emits a photon in a random direction.
Thus, it is an isotropic radiation.
While passing through, the electron loses energy
therefore it is slowed down or braked, which is where the name comes from.
This is something we meet in hot gases like plasmas.
Heat is needed to dissociate atoms,
that is, the nucleus from the electrons, to get a gas of ions and electrons,
namely a plasma.
The shape of the spectrum is given here.
we had fν fλ before. Here we rather use the specific intensity lν.
So this is the curve describing the shape of the spectrum.
We can see that we also have a continuous function with an exponential here.
So the temperature of the gas or the plasma is important here.
Then we have the density of ions and electrons in the plasma.
We can compute easily, by doing
an integral over all frequencies,
the total available power for all wavelengths,
in other words the luminosity of the object.
This radiation is isotropic and is relevant to very massive objects
where gravitational contraction will heat the gas,
such as galaxy clusters.
So we will have plasmas with electrons that interact with ions
and each time we have an acceleration with a
uniform or at least continuous distribution,
as soon as we have a continuous distribution of accelerations,
we will also have a continuous energy distribution of the emitted photons.
Therefore, that spectrum is also continuous.
And finally, yet another type of continuous radiation,
the synchrotron radiation.
It is the same type of radiation as observed
in particle accelerators.
It is a radiation which will cause the particles to slow down.
Here we have an electron which starts spiralling
around a magnetic field line.
Obviously, each time we have a loop like this,
we also have a centripetal acceleration
and like in the case of Bremsstrahlung radiation
we will have
emission of photons.
But here the photons will be emitted in a well-defined direction
because the electrons are channelled by the magnetic field lines.
We note that, in the case of Bremsstrahlung radiation,
the electrons had to interact with ions.
To produce ions, atoms had to separate into electrons and ions
and therefore a heat source was needed.
Thus, we spoke of "thermal radiation".
Here we have a magnetic field that does not need
extreme temperatures, and the gas can even be really cold.
So one speaks of "non-thermal radiation".
In both case, for the Bremsstrahlung
and for the synchrotron radiation, we have continuous radiation.
In the Bremsstrahlung case, the radiative intensity
depends on temperature and electronic density.
Here the radiation depends on the intensity
of the magnetic field and electronic density.
We have a directional radiation.
So if we can observe this type of radiation
as a function of the observed brightness, we will get information
on the intensity of the magnetic field at that location
and on the electronic density.
Here on one slide we summarise
the various types of radiation and especially the synchrotron radiation.
So what we see here are two multi-band images,
i.e. observed at several wave lengths,
of the Crab nebula: Messier 1
A supernova exploded in 1054,
and what we see here are the residues of the explosion.
This is an image taken at three optical wavelengths
and combined into a single image.
And here we have an image where we combine optical radiation
and X ray radiation.
We note that the nebula looks very different
at different wavelengths.
What happens at each locations?
Here in the optical radiation, if we took a spectrum of the nebula,
if we looked at what goes on in these filaments,
we would see a line spectrum, in particular hydrogen and
helium lines which are the most abundant elements
in the stars and also in the remains of supernovas.
By studying the spectrum of these filaments, one can even determine
their temperature, which ranges from 10 000K to 20 000K
and their radial velocity which, measured through the Doppler effect, reaches about 1500km/s .
Now, if we look at the image on the right,
we have a totally diferent picture,
Especially the radiation, the blue part here
which corresponds to the red part in this image,
which  is the optical diffuse radiation, but we can also see a radiation,
here, which is directional.
Actually the X-ray radiation is shown here in blue.
That is a radiation that is emitted tangentially along the magnetic field lines.
We have here a synchrotron radiation, due to a magnetic field
created by a pulsar, a residual star
which, after a supernova explosion,
spins very fast
and produces a magnetic field
around the lines of which electrons will spiral.
Thanks to the study of optical radiation, we can determine
the chemical composition of the gas around the supernova
and obtain the expansion velocity of the nebula
from the observed velocity of the filaments.
We also know the chemical composition.
Thanks to the X-ray emission, one can determine the plasma density,
hence that of the gas of electron and ions, and the intensity
of the magnetic field in the nebula.
The radiation processes we have just seen
are not the only possible ones.
Nevertheless, they are the main processes encountered in astrophysics
to explain the astronomical objects that we see.
They are our main tools to study the universe.
In the following videos we will focus on two processes
that are especially important in astrophysics.
One of them is a continuous radiation, the black body spectrum
and the second is the line spectrum emitted by an atomic or molecular gas.
