In this lecture, we will see more details
about black-body radiation
and the spectral lines produced for example
by an atomic or molecular gas.
The black body, first of all, caracterises heated bodies
that re emit radiation at all wavelengths.
For instance, that is the case of a light bulb filament that converts
electric energy into light.
That is the case of glowing embers which, due to the heating by the flames,
will radiate at all wavelengths.
It is also the case of lava ejected by volcanoes.
This blackbody radiation is characterised by
what we call the Planckian curve
which gives the energy distribution as a function of wavelength
or as a function of frequency.
The units of this luminance (or specific intensity) is a power
by surface unit, by steradian,
for radiation that is emitted in all directions
and optionally by wavelength unit as shown here on that axis,
or by frequency unit.
These Planckian curves have a bell shape
with an increasing and decreasing slope and so also a maximum.
The position of this maximum can be calculated
by deriving the function which gives the luminance.
If we do it here, as a function of wavelength
we will find that the maximum of the curve will occur
at a position that depends only upon the temperature.
We have therefore a linear relation between the position of the maximum
of the black body curve and the black body temperature.
So here we have a constant in m.K.
We can have it in Å.K, which is more useful with the units we use
in astrophysics,  in the wavelength range
used in astrophysics.
We can see here the position of the maximun of the black body curve
for a black body temperature of 6000K.
Or here for a temperature of 5780K.
That is the surface temperature of the sun for example.
and these curves show different temperatures, here 5500K,
5000K and 4500K.
Stars are excellent black bodies.
So we can immediately see that λmax decreases when T increases.
We can indeed observe it here.
A high temperature yields a peak emission
in the short wavelengths, the bluer ones.
And lower temperatures result in emission peaks
that lie at higher wavelengths, the redder ones.
Since we have red on this side of the spectrum and blue on that side,
in the optical wavelengths range
A hot star will appear blue
while a cold stellar object will appear red.
So of course this Wien's displacement law which gives the position of the maximum
of the black body peak as a function of temperature
can be expressed in wavelengths or in frequencies.
depending on whether we express the luminance as a funtion of wavelength
or frequency.
And looking at the two equations we tend to feel that
(λmax x T) x (νmax/T) should be equal to λmax x νmax
of course, but also equal to c.
Actually that is not the case.
If we take the numerical values here, we can see that we have 0.57 * c
and that comes from the fact that Bν is not equal to Bλ,
but is equal to Bλ * dλ/dν as we have shown in a previous lecture
and so is equal to Bλ x λ²/c.
Another feature which will interest us,
is of course the total energy, the energy flux density
developed by a stellar object which radiates black body radiation,
in other words the whole of the luminance at all wavelengths
or at all frequencies.
So once the integration is done the available energy
once we have integrated the black body for example here, under the orange curve,
the result of the integral is the density of the energy flux which is simply
proportional to the temperature to the fourth.
So we have here a proportionality constant which is of course a power
by surface unit and by Kelvin to the minus 4.
As soon as we have the black body temperature we can determine
the radiated power by surface unit at the surface of the black body.
So M, is simply the power emitted by a unit surface
at the surface of the black body.
So now, what is the relation with stellar luminosity?
The luminosity, is here the total energy freed by the star,
The luminosity will be given in erg/s.
This luminosity, will be the surface of the star multiplied by M.
So 4π r² * σ T^4, where we have here the radius of the star.
The flux M will be integrated on the whole surface.
And M is the available power by surface unit
at the surface of the black body here of the star.
So now, we at the level of the earth,
we receive only part of that energy,
at a certain distance d.
If we are situated at a certain distance d,
we will recive a flux by surface unit: the flux F here
which will be L diluted on a sphere of radius 4πd².
So the flux we are receiving, we on the ground, is L / 4πd²,
that is receivend on earth.
For this, the unit of F will be erg by second by cm squared
because it is diluted on a sphere of radius d,
and also by Angstrom in case we are interested in the spectroscopy
where we disperse the light as a function of wavelength.
A lot of stellar objects emit black body radiation.
Our Sun to begin with, whose surface emits
in the visible wavelength range the energy produced at the center of the Sun
by nuclear reactions.
The dust in the disks of spiral galaxies
is heated by young stars, found in the spiral arms,
visible here on the right in the optical image of the galaxy.
This energy emitted by the stars, is absorbed by interstellar dust
and re emitted in the form of black body radiation
whose peak is situated in the infra-red wavelength
as can be seen here on the image to the right,
of the same galaxy but taken in the infra-red wavelengths.
One of the most beautiful black bodies is probably the cosmological black body
whose spectrum is shown here as a function of frequency.
It is an isotropic micro-wave radiation which is present everywhere in the universe
and whose origin lies in the Big Bang.
The universe which was extremely hot extended itself and became colder,
emitting an ambiant radiation which corresponds now,
13,7 billion years after the big bang
to a black body whose temperature is very close to the absolute zero : 2,73K.
What you see here are the measurement points in black,
and the theoretical curve as a solid line.
You see that theory and measurements perfectly agree.
Black body radiation is certainly
one of the most common types of radiation in astrophysics.
It produces a continuous spectrum.
The other type of frequently encountered spectrum is the line spectrum
which we will see in a moment.
We had already talked about atomic lines in a previous chapter.
We had taken the example of a relatively hot star, here at 15000K.
Now that we have learned about black bodies, we see that a hot star
essentially radiates in the blue wavelengths.
That is what happens here.
We have an extremely steep spectrum in the blue
and we have a continuous one, which is the black body spectrum
which is described by the Planckian curve.
Now, on top of that, we have a line spectrum,
with absorption lines in this case,
which are due to hydrogen atoms present in the atmosphere,
in the upper layers of the stellar atmosphere.
Let's see in more details the line spectrum produced in this case here
by the hydrogen atoms.
For that, let's go back to Bohr's atomic model
where the electron is in orbit around the proton.
We obviously have an equilibrium between the Coulomb force.
We have a proton and then an electron in orbit around the proton,
namely, a hydrogen atom.
This is the mass times acceleration. This is just the Newtons law here.
Quantum mechanics tells us that kinetic momentum is quantified
and that the kinetic momentum takes an integer value multiplied by a constant.
Here we have an integer value
times a constant, which is the h bar constant
namely the Planck constant divided by 2π, so h / 2π.
The two equations which we have written in the previous slide
are simply Newton's law and the quantification of kinetic momentum,
i.e. the fact that the kinetic momentum of the electron around the proton
can take only very specific values.
These two equations will permit us to express the total energy of the electron.
So the kinetic energy here and the potential energy here,
as a function of n and the Planck constant,
so an integer value and the Planck constant,
rather then as a function of the radius and the velocity of the electron.
So we have two equations with two unknowns, the solution is trivial.
We come back to the total energy of the electron, which will be negative
since the system is bound.
The total energy will depend upon a constant, is negative
and will depend on the energy level characterised by n,
which we defined earlier and which is responsible for
the quantification of the kinetic momentum.
The energy of the electron is quantified. The total energy will depend
on an integer value and a constant.
We recognise here a lot of physical constants:
the Planck constant divided by 2π,
the mass and charge of the electron
and  the electrostatic permittivity constant of vacuum ε0.
If we express all that in numerical terms we find that this constant is
2.18 x 10^-18 Joules
It is an energy.
If we convert the result into a more useful energy unit
for particle physics or astrophysics
or also for atomic physics, we find -13,6 eV.
So for the record, an electron-volt is the energy acquired by one electron
at rest when it is accelerated by a voltage difference of 1 Volt.
That is the definition of an electron-volt.
We saw that the total energy is quantified,
so we have an energy that is a function of the integer value n
and depends on the constant -13,6eV * (1/n²)
where in fact n characterises the orbit on which moves
an electron around the proton.
We have a proton here and then we have an electron that might be
on an orbit n1 or on an orbit n2.
The electron will be able to go from one orbit to another
by gaining or losing energy.
If for example a photon is absorbed by an atom
the electron will be able to go from the n1 layer to the n2 layer
by gaining energy.
Conversely, we can also have electrons
that are in the n2 layer, an "excited" layer,
and then will go back to the n1 layer.
The atom will lose energy,
by emitting a photon with a certain energy hν.
What the frequency of this photon will be ?
We can compute it by simply calculationg the energy difference
between the atomic layers of the hydrogen atom.
For example, the energy difference between layers 1 and 2
can be expressed using the equation we have seen before.
-13,6 times the difference of the numerical constants here.
So (1/n1² -1/n2²) is of course in electron-volts.
It is also the energy that the photons will have once emitted
by the hydrogen atoms that will go down
from the layer n2 to n1.
It is also the energy one has to bring to an hydrogen atom to
raise an electron from layer n1 to layer n2.
We can summarize here in a figure what happens in a hydrogen atom.
We said that we have multiple possible energy levels that correspond
each time to an integer value, from 1 to the limit, infinity.
We could not represent here all the energy levels
between the layer 5 and infinity.
But if we could zoom in we would see more and more layers.
We can have all possible transitions
between a starting layer and arrival layers.
For example to go from the fundamental layer, here,
to higher energy layers, one needs energies that will be characterised
by photons whose wavelengths are written here.
So, if we want energies, high energy differences,
we need photons with short wavelengths
so with high frequencies and therefore high energy differences.
Here have the first series of lines called the Lyman series,
which corresponds to all possible transitions
between the fundamental layer and all other atomic layers.
So if we supply an atom with an energy higher then 13.6eV, the atom will get ionized.
In other words, it will lose its electron.
So an ionized gas is a gas transformed into a mix of ions and electrons.
So for the Lyman series, we see that
the wavelengths are in the ultraviolet.
If we play the same game starting from layer 2 to all layers above it,
we get the so-called Balmer series
which, this time, is in the optical range.
Finally, if we start a bit further still, from the next energy level,
we will find the Paschen series, which is in the infrared.
Of course there are other series, going further and further
in wavelength
and to lower and lower energy differences.
Now lets go back to the example of a star we had before
the star with a black body spectrum of  15000K
and whose radiation peak is located in the blue part of the spectrum.
So we can recognise here some lines of the Balmer series.
The Balmer series is here and we can see if we want to predict
the wavelengths of the different transitions here
that we have for example a line at 4861Å which is actually the Hβ line.
So this is 4861Å.
So if we look here we see exactly
the wavelength predicted by this formula.
If we look at the following line, we have Hγ at 4341Å
which will be here.
The Hα line lies outside of
the wavelength range of this spectrum,
so it is not visible.
If we went further and further down the blue side of the spectrum,
we would have a whole series of lines, here,
from layer 2 to all the layers that we couldn't represent
and that would be in this box here.
We haven't shown them here, since there would be an infinity of arrows here.
That said, we can see them in the spectrum of the star.
This multitudes of lines has a limit, here we have a limit
that corresponds to the ionisation of the atom.
So if an electron is on layer 2 and we provide it with a higher energy,
than the energy so to -3,39 eV, the atom will lose its electron and so be ionised.
No lines will be formed since the atom doesn't exist any more
as an atom.
We have a proton/electron pair, so an ionised gas.
Here are all line series we can directly observe
in the spectrum of the star.
There exists a wide variety of astronomical objects
characterized by a line spectrum.
The line spectrum is often typical of the interstellar medium where the atoms
excited by stellar radiation produce a spectrum
consisting almost exclusively in lines.
The latter inform us about the cheamical composition of the gas
of which nebulae are made.
The same is true of planetary nebulae
where the differents gas layers are excited by the radiation
of the white dwarf star lying at the centre of the nebula.
And, closer to us, the polar aurorae we can see
during strong solar activity display also a line spectrum.
We can see one here from the International Space Station.
In this case the atoms in the upper layers of the terrestial atmosphere
are excited by collisions with the protons
and electrons from the Sun
that are captured in the terrestrial magnetic field.
It is by losing energy through de-excitation that the atoms emit the polar auroras
which have a magnificent line spectrum.
