The Doppler-Fizeau is one of the most invaluable tools in astrophysics.
It allows a direct measurement of the velocity of stellar objects
and so enables the study of their movement.
When used along with the Viriel theorem or the Kepler's laws,
both bringing in the velocities,
it also allows indirect measurement of the masses of celestial bodies.
It concerns the effect of the combination of velocities
when a source moves with respect to the observer.
The wavelength of the emitted wave, it may be sound or light,
decreases if the source moves toward the observer,
and thus we observe blueshift.
The wavelength increases if the source moves away from the observer,
in this case redshift  is observed.
One can see here a moving light source
and a representation of the perception of wavelength by the observer.
When the source moves forward, the wavelength is compressed
and the light seen by the observer is bluer.
While moving in the opposite direction,
the wavelength increases and so it is seen redder,
redshift is observed.
How does the Doppler effect work?
Considering at first a source at rest.
It was just said that the Doppler effect is due to the combination of movements,
the combination of velocities,
so the velocity of wavelength propagation and the velocity of the emitting source.
Here we have a source at rest emitting a spherical wave
with some speed c
and wavelength lambda zero (λ0).
λ0 is shown here,
so wavelength is the pulsation of the wave.
In the case of the light, the velocity is equal to c.
Now, what is happening when the source moves?
Here we have a wavefront that was emitted at the time
when the source was in this place.
The source will continue to emit the wavefronts while moving forward.
While this wavefront was emitted,
this one was propagating, and so on.
Here we arrive at a situation
in which the wavefronts were emitted in the same way as when the source was at rest
but are combined with the velocity of the source.
It can be noticed that the wavefronts are closer to each other toward the observer
and further from each other in the opposite direction.
How does it work?
Here the wavelengths will appear bluer
and here redder.
Now, let's draw the axis representing the direction of the observer
and the source with some velocity v.
Then, the source emits the wavefronts
so we can draw one here and another one over here.
Wavelength emitted by the source at rest,
will be called λ0.
Now we consider Δt,
the time interval between two wavefronts seen by the observer.
What will be this time interval?
Obviously, if the source is at rest Δt is equal to Δt0,
which is also the period of the wave.
We can say that Δt0 is the period of the wave,
the period of the wave at rest.
The relation between those two time intervals is Δt = Δt0 if nothing moves.
But if the source is not at rest, during the time Δt0
it will move a given distance Δx
continuously emitting wavefronts.
Finally, the time separating two wavefronts seen by the observer
will be equal to Δt0  minus another time interval
that is equal to the time needed for the source to move with the velocity v
a distance Δx that is shown here.
Of course, the velocity of the wave is c.
Now, one just has to rewrite Δx as vΔt0
which is the distance the source moved during the time that separates
two wavefronts at rest with the velocity v.
Obviously, it is divided by c
as the wave is propagating with the speed of light
in the case of the electromagnetic waves.
We also have that λ= cΔt,
so it suffices to divide the whole expression by  c
to obtain that λ , the wavelength seen by the observer,
is  λ minus v/c λ0.
This is the expression for the Doppler effect
that combines the wavelength in the reference frame of the source,
so, what the source sees while emitting the wave,
and the wavelength seen by the observer.
Here the case of the source moving toward the observer was presented,
but if the source moves away, the sign changes here for +,
so we would be in the situation where
the wave propagates in a direction opposite to the observer.
The expression for the Doppler effect can be written in several different ways.
In the previous slide it was written in this way.
The minus sign is due to the fact that,
as was seen in the figure which was just drawn,
the source moves toward the observer.
The plus sign appears if the source moves away from the observer.
It should be noted that
the sources do not always
move in the same direction as the line of sight to the observer.
Let say the observer is in this place.
In one situation the source can go in the direction of the observer,
but there can also be the case in which the source moves in the other direction.
Let this be the velocity vector, the angle θ is the angle
between the line connecting the source with the observer and the velocity vector.
What counts in this case
is the velocity of the source along the line of sight -
the velocity that is projected on the line of sight.
So in fact the full expression for the Doppler effect
Is Δλ/λ, or  λ -λ0/λ0,
equals minus v over c  times the cosine of the angle between the velocity vector
and the line of sight connecting the source to the observer.
Clearly, θ takes the values in the range from 0 to π.
The redshift is often written as z
The redshift is often written as z
and relates for example to the cosmological redshift.
The expression for the Doppler effect can be written in more compact way
as λ = λ0 times (1 + z).
If the velocity or the redshift of the source is known,
one can relate the observed wavelengths
to the wavelengths emitted by the source
as if it was at rest.
We have already defined the redshift,
but how in practice the redshift is measured ?
or the blueshift is measured ?
Speaking of colours,
one can see here an example of the spectrum, the image of a star
as seen with a telescope.
The image, instead of being directly recorded with the CCD camera
or another detector,
is divided into many parts from which one is selected.
In fact, in focal plane of the telescope
a mask is placed
in the shape of the slit, as shown here.
The image if the slit can be observed with a prism
or a diffraction grating.
In this way the image of the slit
can be observed over the whole range of wavelengths.
So the spectrograph works in such a way
that the image is formed in the focal plane of the telescope,
then a part of this image is selected.
Here the star is seen as a point
so the light is dispersed from the blue to the red part of the spectrum, as illustrated in the figure.
If the observed object was an extended light source, there would be a spectrum like this one
at all the points of the slit.
So what the spectrograph does
is to create an image of the slit at all wavelengths.
Here we would have the slit seen in green light,
and in this place the image of the slit can be drawn
at the wavelengths toward the red part of the spectrum.
The idea behind this is to create the image of the slit
at all wavelengths.
The slit is placed here, the image of the slit is created.
The spectrum is the combination of the successive images of the slit.
Once we have the spectrum,
how the redshift can be measured in practise?
As an example we show a nebula
or a gas cloud emitting emission lines.
This gas cloud moves for example in the direction of the observer
that is placed here.
In this situation the cloud has some velocity towards the line of sight to the observer,
let it be the velocity v.
In this case a blueshift is expected to occur.
Let’s draw the spectrum of this object.
We place
two axes
and draw a simple spectrum
that is just an emission line.
On the y axis we have the flux Fλ, and the x-axis corresponds to the wavelength.
If we consider this simple spectrum composed of one emission line,
for example the hydrogen line Hα at 6565 ångström (Å),
what will happen to this line ?
In this case we have a blueshift
so the line shifted toward the blue will be seen here
and in this case
the wavelength of the line
will be λ =λ0 times 1 minus v/c.
Conversely,
if the velocity vector is in the opposite direction,
so, when the source moves away from the observer,
then we observe a red shift
and the spectrum shifts toward red
and will be seen in this way.
The redshifted line will have the wavelength of λ= λ0 times 1 plus v / c.
So in this case the cloud moves toward the observer.
If the cloud moves
in a different direction than along the line of sight to the observer,
we can choose for example this direction,
one has to multiply the velocity v by the cosine of the angle θ.
We have just seen an example of a cloud
emitting a line, in our case the line Hα.
Now, we can look at the situation in which there is an absorption line.
Obviously, Doppler effect applies also in this case.
Here we have a star
whose spectrum is that of the  black body.
The light of the star passes through the cloud composed of cold gas
and propagates toward the observer.
The cloud of cold gas
contains atoms, for example hydrogen
but it can also include other atoms.
We can have for example the line Hα that we have just seen
with the wavelength 6565 ångström  (Å), so the optical line,
or a line of the Lyman series - Lyman α,
at 1216 ångström  (Å).
We have the situation in which there is a cloud of cold gas
that absorbs light, creating an absorption spectrum
seen superposed with the spectrum of the star.
Firstly, we draw the velocity vector of the cloud
and the spectrum,
as before the y axis corresponds to Fλ, x axis to λ.
We could also have Fν, ν
if we would like to present the spectrum in a different way.
This is the curve representing the black body spectrum,
the Planck spectrum,
as an example it could be the spectrum of the Sun at 5780 K.
What will be observed depends on the velocity of the cloud:
if the cloud is at rest, an absorption line,
for example the line Hα,
will be observed
at λ equal to λ0 =6565 ångström, as v = 0.
If the cloud moves toward the observer
the line will be blueshifted
and the same absorption line
will be observed but toward the blue part of the spectrum.
In this case λ = λ0 (1- v/c).
As we have seen, the Doppler effect
applies for the emission lines, as well as for the absorption lines.
Now we will see in details how the Doppler effect can be used.
As an example we take the case of the rotation of the Sun or of the stars in general.
We draw the rotation axis of the Sun
and the solar equator.
Then, we can take the solar spectrum
by placing the slit in this way
in order to select a piece of the Sun.
Here, the slit is drawn quite large on purpose.
In this position, at the border of the Sun, the velocity vector is directed toward the observer,
it will be at position 1.
On the equator,
the velocity vector is tangential,
this will be position 3.
In this place the velocity vector has the opposite direction than at position 1,
it can be called position 2.
It was said that the spectrum is the image of the slit
at different wavelengths.
We will represent it in this image; drawing the slit
thicker than before
and selecting a line that would be
in the green part of the spectrum.
Then we will look at the points 1, 2 and 3 on the slit.
The point 3 is in this place, the point 1 in the upper part, and the point 2 is here.
We can see that the point 2 is moving away from us
so the point that is in this place will be redshifted.
The velocity at point 3
does not have a radial component
so this point stays in the same place
its wavelength being equal to λ =λ0.
Point 1 is moving in our direction
so it will be blueshifted.
One can imagine
the series of points for which the redshift will be measured.
There are different velocities
so in this place the points are blueshifted.
In this way, a new image of the slit can be seen
when all the points are shifted in such manner.
If the wavelength at rest
is equal to λ0,
once shifted, all the wavelengths λ0 will be placed
on the new image of the slit.
Consequently, all the emission or absorption lines of the Sun
will be seen inclined in the spectrum.
Obviously, if  the star was rotating in the other direction
the new image of the slit would be tilted also in the opposite direction.
Now let's look at an important application in astrophysics,
namely the search of the exoplanets using the measurement of the radial velocities
of the stars that host a planetary system
outside the Solar system.
It is not an easy task
because the distance between a star and a planet
is small,
and the luminosity contrast between those two is generally
very high.
The contrasts can reach tens of magnitude, in some cases even more.
So it is difficult to directly detect
an exoplanet with direct imaging
around the host star.
Let's see what happens when the planet rotates about
the centre of mass of the star-planet system.
Representing a few positions
during the planet's rotation,
and drawing what is happening at each position;
Here is the star and
its planet are at position 1.
In this place we mark the centre of gravity of those two objects,
here position 2 of the star and the corresponding position of the planet.
At position 3 the planet is here,
while for position 4 here.
Of course each time the velocity vector
at positions 1, 2, 3 and 4
is equal to vmax.
One has to pay attention, to the fact that the velocity is equal to vmax times sinus i,
which is measurable with spectroscopic measurements,
on account of the inclination of the planetary orbit
with regard to the plane of the sky.
This is the direction to the observer.
When the spectrum of the system is available
it is only the star that is visible
and not the planet.
Those are the oscillations of the star's velocity that will be detected
around the centre of mass of the star-planet system.
Let's draw this situation.
The important data can be obtained from the star's spectra
taken at regular intervals.
The velocity will be presented on the y axis,
so v sin i, as a function of time.
This curve is called the velocity curve.
Obviously, the stars in the Galaxy have some velocity
so we need to centre the axis on the mean velocity
of our star in the Galaxy.
This velocity is typically equal to some tens or hundreds of km/s.
The mean velocity
can be represented
in this way
with an arbitrary direction.
This vector represents the mean velocity of the star in the Galaxy,
so the velocity of the centre of mass of the system.
The star rotates about the centre of mass,
and we can put the data coming from the different positions on the diagram.
Starting with position 1:
if the observer is here,
there is no radial component of the velocity
and  no change observed with respect to the mean velocity.
On the contrary, for position 2
the velocity vector is radial with respect to the observer,
and a point corresponding to this position can be placed here.
This velocity is equal to v mean +v max sin i .
Position 3 corresponds to position 1,
with the difference that this point is obtained further in time.
As before, the velocity is equal to the mean velocity because of the lack of the radial component.
Position 4 is similar to position 2
but the velocity vector has the opposite direction
so on the diagram the point should be placed on the other side.
The velocity in this case is equal to v mean minus v max times the sine of the inclination.
By connecting the points
we obtain the velocity curve
which is obviously periodic.
So what we can measure directly is the rotation period
of the star around the centre of gravity
which is equal to the rotation period of the planet around the centre of gravity,
as we are in the frame of the centre of mass of the system.
That kind of curve, the velocity curve of a star, suffices
to deduce the period of rotation of the planet
and the maximal velocity of the star rotating around the gravity centre.
This was another important application of the Doppler effect.
At last, the Hubble law, so we do now a drastic change in spatial scales
and enter into the domain of cosmology.
As the Universe expands,
the distances between the galaxies,
schematically presented in the figure,
will increase with time.
Because of this expansion
so, after some time the galaxies have moved away from each other.
The metric expanded
and all the arrows drawn here on the image become larger.
Due to the increased distances,
if the observer was placed in one of those galaxies
he/she would observe the other galaxies moving away.
The Hubble law
relates the velocity of galaxies that move away,
this velocity being completely radial
with respect to the line of sight to each galaxy.
so the velocity of these galaxies is proportional to the distance between the galaxies.
These velocities of the galaxies are measured using the Doppler effect,
the distance, as it will be seen later, is measured with the distance modulus.
Then, the proportionality constant can be deduced.
As we have seen during this lecture,
the Doppler-Fizeau effect has lots of applications in astrophysics:
from the search for exoplanets using velocity curves
of stars hosting planets,
to the rotation of stars
and to the measurement of the temperature of the interstellar medium,
or to the measure of the rate of expansion of the Universe
using the recessional velocity of galaxies.
We will get back many times to the Doppler effect during this course.
It is worth mentioning that
each time a theoretical model, an idea or a concept predicts velocities,
the practical way of measuring them will be by using the Doppler effect.
