In this video we will see with more details what a comet is.
They are very small bodies
with a diameter not much larger than a few kilometres
and composed of 80% of water ice
as well as organic compounds
such as carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen.
Comets come from a large spherical cloud
at the limit of the solar system, known as
the Oort Cloud,
named after the Dutch astronomer
who first suggested its existence.
The spherical geometry of the cloud and its supposed size
of the order of 100'000 astronomical units,
that is, 100'000 times the size of the Earth orbit,
are deduced from the fact that the orbits of comets have
sometimes an extreme eccentricity, so they are extremely elongated.
They have sometimes very long orbital periods
up to several centuries,
such as the Halley comet with a period of 76 years,
and the orbital inclinations are distributed almost randomly.
In other words, comets come
randomly from all directions.
At the distance of the Oort cloud,
the gravitational forces from stars other than the Sun
are not negligible any more, so that from time to time,
a small gravitational perturbation
caused by stars in the Milky Way are able
to pull a comet out of the cloud and through it toward the Sun.
In some way, the Oort cloud is
a natural reservoir of comets
created at the same time as the solar system.
This is why the study of comets is so essential.
They consist in genuine fossils of our solar system
composed of the primordial matter that formed the planets
and that may be at the origin of life.
Here are two cometary nuclei visited by the NASA mission Deep Impact.
Left is Tempel 1 with a diameter of 7.6 km
and right is Hartley 2 with a very small nucleus of 2.2 km wide.
When a comet approaches the Sun, the surface of the nucleus melts
and matter is ejected to form large and diffuse tails
such as here with the comet Hale-Bopp.
You see here the blue ionised tail, composed of gas,
and the other one, more diffuse, composed of dust
spreads here with a greyish colour.
We will see in more details in this video
how cometary tails are formed.
Let us have a look at how cometary tails are formed.
We consider a cometary particle
at the surface of the comet, on a orbit with a period P_1
at a given distance of the Sun. Following the third Kepler's law
with the period P here, divided by the distance to the Sun a there.
And M here is the mass of the Sun.
We have a competition between two forces.
On the one hand, is the gravitational force
acting on this grain
and on the other hand is the radiative pressure.
Lets call the force created by this radiative pressure F rad
The dust grain is at equilibrium between the two forces.
It has a given mass, a given cross section
and therefore a given size.
There is an opposition
between the radiative pressure
caused by solar photons
collected on its cross section
and the gravitational force which also depends on the size of the grain
through its density.
The effect of the radiation is proportional to R²,
the particle cross section,
and the mass is proportional to 4/3 de π R³
where R is the radius of the grain.
Obviously, as soon as the radiative pressure
exceeds the gravitational force,
the grain is ejected of the surface of the comet
and leaves then radially with regard to the Sun.
When this happens, the grain reaches another orbit
with another orbital radius.
We see here the change of orbit.
We push the grain, so it leaves to another orbit
with a period larger than the orbital period of the comet.
Therefore the grain drifts behind the comet.
And now for an even larger orbit.
By simply writing the third Kepler's law we see that the orbital period
gets larger when the radius increases.
A grain with some momentum
given by the solar photons
is pushed over time to orbits of greater radii
and therefore of greater periods.
We have thus the formation of a curved cometary tail.
But there is more. We can also have grains
much smaller in size and as such much lighter,
such as molecules for example. Molecules are immediately
ejected outside of the orbit.
Therefore the grains do not have time to change orbit in
such a continuous way.
They are directly swept by the solar wind.
We were saying that there is an opposition between
the gravitational force
and the radiative pressure,
as well as an equilibrium between the two forces.
Let us write this equilibrium.
How do we express the radiative pressure?
Each photon has a given energy
E = hν
and a given momentum p.
Its energy can be expressed as a function of the momentum.
The momentum p associated to each photon
is equal to its energy divided by the speed of light c.
The radiative pressure F_rad
can be written as E/c since each time
a photon is absorbed by the dust grain
or the molecule on the comet
it gains momentum equals to E/c.
That is, the momentum change of the dust grain is E/c,
which is a force.
Of course not all photons are absorbed
by the cometary particle.
Only the photons with an appropriate impact parameter
are absorbed.
This impact parameter is simply the grain cross section,
namely  σ_g.
Let us now compute the different forces.
We have first the gravitational force here
and the radiative pressure.
The grain has a given cross section :
σ_g = π R².
The mass of the grain is :
4/3 π R³  ρ_g
where ρ_g is its density.
Let us now express the different forces.
The norm of the radiative pressure F_rad is
E/c * σ_g.
Now E is the solar energy received by the grain,
so it is simply the solar luminosity L
over  4 π r²
We have obviously the factor c here
and the cross section of the grain, π R²
Note the upper case R.
Then we have the gravitational force.
It is the gravitational force exerted by the Sun on the grain :
it is G M, where M is the mass of the Sun,
it is G M, where M is the mass of the Sun,
times m_g the mass of the grain that we expressed here,
divided by the distance between the two bodies, r²
With the density expressed previously here.
The gravitational force
can also be written as :
G M / r²
times ρ_g the grain density,
times  4/3 π R³, the cube of the grain radius.
We can now compute the ratio between the norm
of the gravitational force and the norm of the radiative pressure force.
If we rearrange all these terms,
we find the ratio to be :
16 π G times the mass of the Sun
times R the radius of the grain,
times its density and the speed of light,
over 3 times the solar luminosity.
We have simply expressed the ratio by rearranging the terms
as functions of the quantities that we previously defined here.
We are of course interested in knowing whether there is an equilibrium or not.
We can for example deduce
the radius of the grain that ensures equilibrium.
We can define a critical radius
for which a typical cometary dust
is of roughly 2000 angströms.
This is the maximum radius of a dust grain
under which the grain remains bound to the comet.
We saw that the mass of the grain is of the order of R³
while the cross section is of the order of  R².
When the grain gets too big,
it becomes too heavy in regards to its cross section
and cannot leave the surface of the comet anymore.
In such a case, the solar photons are not able to
eject the grain from the surface of the comet anymore.
Here is a typical example of the spreading of two cometary tails.
There is first a tail of light particules, a tail of ions,
that are generally CO+ ions.
These particules are extremely light and extremely small
so they are ejected directly out of the orbit of the comet
by the solar photons.
And here is a dust tail.
These particles are much heavier.
It takes more time to transfer momentum
from the solar photons to the cometary particles
and therefore to change their orbit.
It takes longer to push them away from the orbit of the comet
and are affected by Kepler's laws
and therefore slowly drift behind the comet.
We can see this on another picture.
We have here the comet McNaught imaged from the observatory
of Cerro Paranal in Chile.
This is where the VLT is located, the European « Very Large Telescope »
composed of four 8m telescopes in the Andes.
This picture is taken just after sunset.
I draw the Sun here.
Of course the Sun emits photons isotropically.
The orbit of the comet around the Sun is roughly like that,
or at least we can materialize it in this way.
And here are the radius vectors.
You remember that these radius vectors
sweep out equal areas in equal times.
This was the second Kepler's law that we show here as a reminder.
Finally we have the solar photons
which are produced radially in such a way here.
which are produced radially in such a way here.
Two cometary tails are formed. The ion tail
is in this direction.
On this picture it is very thin, we almost cannot see it
but the particles are indeed ejected in this direction,
radially with respect to the orbit of the comet.
The heavier particles
are affected more slowly over time by the Sun's radiative pressure.
So particles will change their orbit.
Here is an orbit with a period P_1
and here a period P_2 greater than  P_1.
If I add another point on the orbit there,
it will have a period P_3 greater than P_2
just like on the slide we showed previously.
Since all these orbits have greater and greater periods,
the cometary dust grains are delayed
with respect to the cometary nucleus
which of course stays on the same orbit with a period P_1.
We have seen how the solar photons
can change the trajectory of cometary particles
through the radiative pressure.
As many physical phenomena presented during this course,
the one we just saw while studying comets
manifests itself in several scenarios
such as for example the formation and life of stars.
We will see that the radiative pressure
due to the photons
created in thermonuclear reactions in the core of stars prevents them
from a gravitational collapse
and thus allow them to shine for millions,
or even billions of years.
