We will now talk about the planets and their atmospheres
and in particular on their influence on the physical conditions
on the surface of a planet.
The Earth, Venus and Mars are for example three very similar planets
yet their atmosphere are very different
as well as the meteorological features on their surface.
We will see in a simplified manner
how the energy budget of a planet,
namely the balance between received and emitted energy,
completely determines the physical conditions on the surface
and therefore maybe the development of life.
For example, on Venus the greenhouse effect is such that
the surface temperature is completely determined by atmospheric physics
and the atmosphere is so opaque to radiation
that only radar imaging is able to unveil the surface of the planet,
such as on this picture taken by NASA's Magellan probe.
To understand the influence of planetary atmospheres
on their planet,
let us have a look at the energy budget of each planet,
in particular the Earth.
We have here a simplified representation of the solar system.
The Sun is here,
the Earth is here
and here we have another planet, Saturn for example.
The Earth is of course at one astronomical unit away from the Sun
and Saturn, or any other planet, is at a distance d.
We will now look at the energy budget,
what is the energy received by planets
and what is the energy emitted by planets.
First the energy received on Earth.
The energy received at the top of the atmosphere
can be measured for example by satellites
and is called the solar constant.
The solar constant  S is an energy flux,
or more accurately a power flux, the numerical value of which is :
1.37 · 10^6  erg / cm² s
1.37 · 10^6  erg / cm² s
since the solar energy is diluted, spread
over a sphere with a surface of 4π times the square of one astronomical unit.
At a distance d,
namely the distance d here,
S(d) is the solar energy,
S integrated on a sphere with a surface of 4π
times the square of one astronomical unit :
4π · d(Earth),
so this is the square of one astronomical unit,
and diluted on a sphere with a surface of 4πd².
We have then here  1 / 4πd².
Finally S(d) is simply a rescaling of S
by a factor (d(Earth)/d)²
by a factor (d(Earth)/d)²
We have just seen the energy received by the Earth.
Now let us have a look at the full energy balance for the Earth.
We have some energy here that is absorbed,
which we just talked about.
It is the energy flux coming from the Sun.
We have some emitted energy
which is the energy produced by the planet itself
for example due to radioactivity in the mantle or the terrestrial crust.
Finally there is some radiated energy.
This radiated energy is
due to the black body radiation.
E_cn here is a black body radiation.
If we observe the Earth from outside of the solar system
and measure its spectrum, we will see a black body spectrum.
What is now the energy balance?
There is the solar flux which is absorbed energy
and there is energy emitted directly by the Earth.
Their sum must be equal to the black body energy,
the one we observe from outside the solar system,
the energy that an outside observer would receive.
We rewrite the absorbed energy
as a function of the solar constant.
It is equal to the solar constant
times the Earth's cross section.
It is the energy received on Earth.
The Earth's cross section is πR².
Obviously only a part of the light is absorbed
and the rest is reflected.
We express this with the factor 1-A
where A is called the albedo.
If A = 1 then all the radiation is reflected
and if A = 0 all of it is absorbed.
For the Earth, A = 0,3.
So we have an absorbed radiation
plus an emitted radiation, of which we're going to talk later,
equal to the black body radiation.
As we just wrote, the absorbed radiation is
π times the radius of the Earth squared, namely the cross section,
times the solar constant, times 1 minus the Albedo.
The emitted radiation, which can for example be produced
by the liquid magma under the terrestrial crust and its radioactivity,
is the surface of the Earth,
4 π · R(Earth)²
times Q the produced energy
by this radioactivity, say at ground level.
We can measure the value of Q
and find 0,06 W/m² at ground level.
and find 0,06 W/m² at ground level.
We multiply Q by the factor 4πR²
to get the total energy emitted by Earth at ground level.
Now what about the energy radiated as black body radiation.
As we saw in the lecture on the black body,
a black body emits an energy flux depending on its temperature : σT^4.
So we have σT^4, T being the effective temperature of the black body.
We have to multiply this by the total surface radiating this flux
which is simply 4π times the Earth's radius squared.
This gives the complete energy balance.
Let us rewrite this equation in a slightly different manner.
So we have :
the absorbed energy plus the emitted energy is the black body energy.
If we rearrange the different terms,
we end-up with the following equation.
So we have 4σT^4,
with T the effective temperature
which is actually the parameter we are interested in,
over (1 - A) · S.
For the Earth,
A = 0,3
which means that 30% of the light is reflected.
We also had that Q = 0.06 W/m²
We also had that Q = 0.06 W/m²
at the Earth's surface.
The solar constant S on the terrestrial orbit is
S = 1,37 · 10^6 erg / cm² s
S = 1,37 · 10^6 erg / cm² s
If we plug all these numbers in this equation
we get that the black body temperature
of the Earth is 255 K.
Note that this is the Earth's black body effective temperature
and not the temperature at ground level
which is completely dominated by the climatology,
by Earth's atmosphere.
We just saw that the Earth behaves like a black body.
We have the Earth with an atmosphere
acting as a filter.
We have on the one hand the incoming radiation from the Sun
which is UV and visible light
and on the other hand the outgoing radiation
which is infrared light
since we have a black body with a temperature of 255 K
which peaks in the infrared domain.
On one side we have UV radiation.
If I draw here the emitted or received
flux on Earth as a function of the wavelength,
we have a black body curve.
So this is a black body at a temperature of 5780 K,
So this is a black body at a temperature of 5780 K,
namely the Sun.
This is some radiation with a peak in the UV/optical according to Wien's law
and it is an incoming radiation.
We have therefore an incoming UV/optical radiation
which attempts to pass through the Earth's atmosphere
acting itself as a filter.
The Earth itself, as we just computed,
emits black body radiation,
with a curve of the same shape
but this time with a black body temperature of 255 K.
but this time with a black body temperature of 255 K.
The Earth emits then in the infrared domain,
and this is an outgoing radiation.
What happens in the atmosphere ?
We show here as a function of the altitude and of the wavelength
the different filters blocking the several kinds of radiation.
First in the upper atmosphere, at an altitude of 10km,
First in the upper atmosphere, at an altitude of 10km,
we have water molecules
and ozone molecules.
At ground level, up to a few hundred metres
or a few kilometres high,
we have CO2 particles
as well as of course some water.
There is also water quite high in the atmosphere.
There is also water quite high in the atmosphere.
It can be water created by the burning of kerosene
by the engines of airplanes.
So here we have water produced by airplanes
and water naturally present at ground level.
On the ground, the CO2 is partly caused by cars.
There is here an ozone layer,
that CFC can destroy.
If we consider all of these together, we have :
UV light that enters the atmosphere
which would be blocked by the ozone layer
but if the ozone has been destroyed it cannot filter this radiation.
If the ozone has been destroyed,
the UV radiation can penetrate all the way to the ground level
because there are no more natural filters.
UV light is blocked by ozone.
If the ozone layer is destroyed, UV radiation can enter the atmosphere
and thus contribute to warming the Earth.
This obviously applies
to any other planet
which has incoming and outgoing radiation
with several filters either at ground level or at high altitude.
We have then UV light blocked by ozone,
which is not blocked if the ozone layer has been destroyed,
and we have an infrared outgoing radiation.
This outgoing radiation could naturally escape
if there was no filter such as CO2
which indeed blocks infrared.
As a result there is less outgoing radiation than there should
and some energy is retained at ground level
by this CO2, as well as by the water at high altitude,
water also being an infrared filter.
Water is naturally found at ground level
but not at high altitude.
Water ejected by the burning of kerosene by airplane motors
acts like a filter blocking the outgoing infrared radiation.
This shows that the climate we know on Earth
and the greenhouse effect on Earth
are due to the Sun's temperature,
the Earth's black body radiation,
and the chemical composition of the atmosphere,
which is either natural or artificially altered by mankind
and sets up a number of filters
blocking incoming or outgoing radiation.
There is a natural equilibrium unless any change is imposed by human activities.
This equilibrium can be broken for example by adding filters here,
water and CO2
or by destroying filters protecting it
from the incoming ultraviolet radiation.
Let us see a few numbers about the influences
on the surface temperature of a planet.
If we take Venus, the Earth and Mars as example,
we see that the solar constant decreases with the distance
but not the black body temperatures
due to the quite different albedos of the planets
and due to the small amount of intrisic energy produced.
However the surface temperature varies heavily
due to the presence of an atmosphere
regulating the energy fluxes
between the planet and the rest of the Universe.
