How to characterize planetary atmospheres ?
They can be either very thin such as the one of  Mars shown here
or extremely dense, which the case of gaseous planets
such as Jupiter or Saturn.
Why can some planets retain their atmosphere
while others cannot ?
In this video we will explore
some answers to these questions.
Among the tools we have access to
to characterize planetary atmospheres
is the hydrostatic equilibrium equation.
As the name suggests, it expresses an equilibrium
between the gas pressure acting in this direction and
the gravitational force acting in the opposite direction.
We represent these 2 forces acting on a volume element,
We represent these 2 forces acting on a volume element,
and we will see how to use this equation,
how to establish the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium
which measures the equilibrium between an infinitesimal pressure
and an infinitesimal gravitational force.
We have drawn here a volume element
with an area dA
and a height dh.
The mass density is ρ
and this small volume element is
at a given altitude h.
h is the altitude in what follows.
There is here an infinitesimal pressure,
the force of which is dP · dA.
If we are interested in the pressure exerted on our infinitesimal volume,
we write it as dP · dA.
Since we seek the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium,
this must be equal to - dF_g
which is the gravitational force exerted on this infinitesimal volume.
The gravitational force is of course the mass of the volume element,
that is the density, which depends on the altitude,
times the gravitational field which can also depend on the altitude,
times the volume of our small cylinder : dA · dh.
We see that dA vanishes
and we can then rewrite this equation in this form :
dP/dh = - ρ(h) .g(h)
Depending on the conditions in which we use this equation,
we can very often assume that
ρ(h) is a constant, ρ.
Moreover, if we have a big planet with a relatively thin atmosphere
g is almost independent of the altitude.
We can therefore assume g(h)  to be a constant g.
Thus, ρ, g, or both of them can be constants.
Let us rewrite the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium
that we have just seen.
We had : dP / dh  =  - ρ g.
We had : dP / dh  =  - ρ g.
Let us solve this equation.
We recall the ideal gas law
which tells us that P = nkT
with T the temperature, k the Boltzmann constant
and n the numerical density of particles.
This numerical density
is the mass density over the mean mass of a particle.
We have thus here μ, the mean molecular mass,
the computation of which we will show later,
and m_u is the atomic mass unit.
Thanks to the ideal gas law,
we get an expression for ρ.
By rearranging the terms, we have that ρ = P μ m_u  /  kT
By rearranging the terms, we have that ρ = P μ m_u  /  kT
which I plug in the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium
to get that dP, not any more over dh but over P,
is equal to, by rearranging the terms
- g μ m_u  /  kT times dh
- g μ m_u  /  kT times dh
We have on the left hand side a dimensionless quantity
so the right hand side must also be dimensionless.
Therefore the dimension of this term is the inverse of a length.
Let us rewrite once again the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium
in a slightly different manner.
We still have dP / P
and the term dh we had previously.
We had a term which was the inverse of a length here,
so we write 1 / H
with H = kT / g μ m_u.
with H = kT / g μ m_u.
This equation is now very easy to solve.
The pressure is a constant times
the exponential of  -h / H .
H is the characteristic height of the atmosphere.
H is the characteristic height of the atmosphere.
At ground level, when h = 0,
P is the ground pressure.
We have thus simply that P is equal to P_0, the ground pressure,
times the exponential of  - h / H.
Let us draw this relation on a figure.
We can plot either the altitude as a function
of the pressure, or the other way around.
We have here the altitude h
and here is P. We are thus drawing the pressure profile.
The pressure profile is an exponential curve
which looks roughly like this.
Here is the zero altitude
so the pressure at this point is P_0.
At this point, where h = H,
the pressure is P_0 / e.
Again, we are here at ground level
and here at high altitude.
This of course assumes that we have solved this equation
in an extremely simple case.
A word on the computation of the mean molecular mass,
which we noted as a mean μ.
Let us make the computation with the Earth as an example.
It represents the mean number of particles in the atmosphere.
We simplify the Earth's atmosphere
by assuming that there is 78% of molecular nitrogen
and 22% of molecular oxygen.
What we want to do is
to count the mean number of particles in the atmosphere.
The molecular nitrogen is N2, the molecular oxygen is O2.
The nitrogen atom has 7 protons and 7 neutrons
therefore 14 nucleons.
14 nucleons for 1 nitrogen atom
means that for the molecule N2
we have 28 atomic mass units.
The oxygen atom has 16 nucleons
and thus for O2 we have 32 atomic mass units.
What is the mean molecular mass?
It is a weighted mean mass.
The weights are simply the proportion of each element
in the atmosphere.
We have 78% times 28 atomic mass unit
plus 22% times 32 atomic mass unit
which we normalize to 0.78 + 0.22
and we find 29 atomic mass unit.
Once we have g, ρ and H,
how can we use this quantity
to see for example if a planet is able to retain its atmosphere or not?
We can consider the escape velocity of a molecule.
We can compare
the escape velocity of a molecule in the atmosphere
with its most probable velocity.
If a particle has a very large ejection speed,
it can break away from
the gravitational attraction of the planet
and as such the planet does not retain its atmosphere.
Therefore we want to compare the escape velocity of the molecules
with the most probable velocity of the molecules in the atmosphere.
We write the escape velocity v_e and it is greater than
the mean velocity of the molecules.
v_e is the escape velocity
which is obtained by computing the kinetic energy
of a particle with a mass m and the escape velocity
and equalling this kinetic energy to the potential energy of the particle
in a gravitational field  g
where  R is the planetary radius
since we consider the altitude zero.
This relation yields immediately the escape velocity, i.e.,
the square root of 2  g times the radius of the planet.
We have on the one hand the escape velocity
and on the other hand the most probable velocity.
We have a gas with thermal agitation.
As such, the velocity distribution is a Boltzmann distribution
just like in thermodynamics
and the most probable mean velocity
is the Gaussian mean of the velocity distribution,
which is equal to the squared root of 2 k T,
where k is still the Boltzmann constant,
over µ m_u .
Here is where the H we previously saw appears.
We can rewrite this mean velocity as
the square root of 2 g H, where H is the characteristic height
we previously computed.
The relation we wrote,
so, V_e  > and the mean V_m,
can be finally written as a comparison
between the planetary radius and the characteristic height of the atmosphere.
In such a case, if R_p > H
the planet can keep its atmosphere.
We have thus established a very simple relation
from the characteristic height of a planet
that tells, by simply comparing the planetary radius with
the characteristic height of the atmosphere,
if a planet can retain its atmosphere or not.
Here is the data from the previous video
for Venus, the Earth and Mars
with the addition of the new quantities we just introduced :
the pressure at ground level, the characteristic height H
and the radius of the planets.
We first notice that in the 3 cases
the planet retains its atmosphere
since H is negligible in regards to the planetary radius.
De facto, the 3 planets, the Earth, Venus and Mars have indeed an atmosphere.
In the second place we notice extreme differences
between the surface pressures
although the 3 planets are otherwise very similar
and they moreover have comparable black body temperatures.
This shows once again that the composition of the atmospheres
and their ability to interact with radiation
completely determines the physics at the surface of a planet
as well as the complete temperature and pressure profiles
of the atmospheres with the altitude.
