In the next three videos
we will take interest in stellar formation and evolution.
In this first video
we will see under which conditions a cloud of gas and dust
can start its collapse until eventually forming a star.
As we see here, stars form in groups
from a gas cloud which fragments
due to local inhomogeneities
and the resulting pieces if they are over a certain mass
or over a critical radius, known respectively as Jeans' mass
and Jeans' length.
These pieces contract and warm up
up to the point where nuclear reactions
of hydrogen fusion start
and give birth to a star.
As we said, stars form from
fragments of a nebula.
We draw here a nebula fragment.
This fragment, if it is over a specific mass or a specific radius
will collapse and as such become smaller and smaller, and denser.
We will see that it implies that the fragment will warm up.
Let us consider a nebula with a given radius R
and as usual a given density,
a total mass and a total number of particles
composing the nebula : atoms and molecules.
The nebula fragment is isolated
and we can then use the Virial theorem
which tells that, averaged in time,
the kinetic energy is minus one half of the potential energy.
We can express the kinetic energy
as a function of temperature : 1/2 k T by degree of freedom.
A 3 dimensional space means 3 degrees of freedom
and N particles leads to N degrees of freedom,
times k the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature.
If we now assume our nebula fragment
to be more or less spherical in shape,
we can compute the potential energy like we did in a previous video :
3 G M²  (M being the total mass) over the radius of the nebula
if it can be approximated to be spherical in shape.
Both quantities are equal by the Virial theorem
and we have then : GM²/R = 3 N k T.
As we have seen with the Virial theorem
and in particular with the simulation shown
in the video 1.4 on the Virial theorem,
If there is a lack of kinetic energy relative to the potential energy,
the gas cloud in this case will start to collapse.
Let us take the aforementioned equation.
We have 3 N k T  <  3/5 GM²/R.
By rearranging the terms, we have
k T smaller than G m averaged that we introduced
in previous videos, over R times M.
With m averaged being the mean mass : M over the number of particles.
If we now also assume that M = 4/3 π R³ times the density,
supposing that the density does not depend on the radius
and that it is therefore constant everywhere in the cloud,
we can then rewrite this inequality in another form.
R goes from the denominator to the numerator
since we invert the inequality
R  >  square root of (15 k T) / (4 π G m ϱ).
The mean mass can be expressed
as a function of the mean molecular mass we previously talked about
times the atomic mass unit.
If there is a lack of kinetic energy
to support the shape of the cloud
then it will collapse
and the inequality we wrote here
comes to defining a critical radius
which is the minimum radius
a cloud of a constant density can have before collapsing.
The radius we juste defined
is called Jeans' length
named for the astronomer who first introduced it.
It is the square root of (15 k T) / (4 π G m ϱ).
This length is the minimal radius from which the gas cloud collapses
at a constant density.
If R is bigger than Jeans' length,
then we have a collapse.
A star can potentially form from such a collapse.
There is some mass contained within Jeans' length
which allows us to define Jeans' mass,
the mass inside Jeans' length.
It is the limit mass before the collapse
of a cloud of a given radius, Jeans' length.
We have a collapsing cloud
and we now seek to know
the time taken for the cloud to collapse.
This is called the free-fall time.
How much time does it take for each point of a roughly spherical cloud
to collapse into a single point, say at the centre of the cloud.
We have a cloud with a radius R just like previously
and we have a particle leaving from the edge of the cloud
and going to the centre of the cloud.
We can consider a straight line
to actually be an ellipse of infinite eccentricity.
I draw here another ellipse with a smaller eccentricity
and again another one with another eccentricity.
You recall Kepler's laws
- we already see the drawing here -
which said that the orbital period is independent from the eccentricity.
All trajectories I am drawing here,
if for example a particle leaves this point and follows this path
until reaching the centre,
it will take the same time as
if it took this other path here.
We thus consider that we have a particle here
on an extremely eccentric orbit
with a radius of R/2.
The free-fall time is therefore
the time taken to go from this point to the centre
which corresponds to half the orbital period.
The orbit has a radius R/2.
The free-fall time is P, the period of the orbits drawn here,
- P being independent of the eccentricity
which is what we're going to compute with Kepler's third law-
divided by 2. This period - according to Kepler's law -
is 4 π/G M²
and here is the a³ which is the cube of the semi-major axis,
the orbital semi-major axis is R/2.
We put the total mass of the cloud in a point here at the centre of the cloud.
If we rewrite the equation, we get this.
It is the period of the relevant orbit.
The free-fall time is equal to the period / 2.
Since the period is squared I have a square root here.
The free-fall time is 3 π/ 32 G ϱ.
What we especially notice
is that the free-fall time only depends on the density ϱ.
Here are a few examples of free-fall times,
a few orders of magnitude.
We have here the density of some objects
including the Universe as a whole,
the density of which being 10^-27 kg/m³
and we have the corresponding free-fall times.
We see that if the whole Universe
collapsed without any resistance
it would take 10^11 years.
This is of course an order of magnitude.
A galaxy with a density of roughly 10^-21 kg/m³
would collapse
in roughly 100 million years.
Clouds in the interstellar medium
take tens of thousands of years
to a few million years to collapse.
The solar system would take 1000 years
and a star such as the Sun with a density of roughly 1.4 tons/m³
would collapse in half an hour.
Yet the Sun does not collapse in half an hour.
To understand this fact, let us have a look at
the energy balance of the Sun.
If we look at the total energy,
its change is equal to the change of potential energy
plus the change of kinetic energy.
This is equal to the energy loss rate,
namely the Sun's luminosity times a time unit.
For an isolated system we have the Virial theorem which tells that
dU + 2 d K = 0.
We now have a system of two equations with two unknowns
which is easy to solve.
We get that dU = - 2 L dT and dK = + L dT.
This means that the star radiating implies
a loss of potential energy.
The luminosity of the star creates a loss of potential energy.
We also notice that half of the lost potential energy
is gained, converted into kinetic energy.
If there is a gain of kinetic energy
it means that the star warms up.
If there is a warm up, there is photon emission by black body or ionization
and if there is photon emission
there is a radiative pressure exerted by the photons
on the external layers of the collapsing stars.
This radiative pressure counteracts the gravitation
and prevents the star from collapsing
in a time of the order of
the free-fall time.
We can go some steps further
and estimate the lifetime of a star by saying that
this lifetime is the time needed
to shine half the potential energy
since this is what the star loses.
We have then half the potential energy, U / 2
radiated at a rate corresponding to the luminosity of the star.
In the case of a sphere, it is simply
3/5 divided by 2, or 3/10
times G M² the mass of the star
over R, this is so far the potential energy of a sphere, divided by 2,
and the L we have here.
This is called the Kelvin-Helmholtz time scale.
It is the lifetime of the star if it radiated
half of the available potential energy.
This is of course only an order of magnitude.
If we make a numerical application
for one solar mass, we find that
the Kelvin-Helmholtz time scale
is around 10 million years.
The Sun is five billion years old
so the time scale is roughly 500 times too small
in the case of the Sun, a star of one solar mass.
There is therefore another energy source that makes the stars shine.
We have seen in a simplified manner how the stars form and
how they take their energy from
the gravitational collapse on the one hand
and the nuclear reactions on the other hand.
As you have indeed understood,
death and birth of stars
are deeply linked.
Generations of stars follow one after the other :
young stars are formed from the material, the remains of dead stars.
It is within diffuse nebulae like the one pictured,
that stellar remains and rising stars live side by side .
In the upcoming videos, and in particular in the very next one,
we will see how stars evolve
once they started up the nuclear reactions in their centre.
We will see what are
the observational methods
to study the many steps of their life.
