In this lecture we will have a look at larger scales
and explore the world of galaxies.
Here is one of the most beautiful illustration of the diversity of galaxies -
the Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
that we already saw before.
It reveals all sorts of galaxies up to faint (large) magnitudes
so it shows very distant galaxies that emit little light.
It is possible to see galaxies up to a magnitude of 29.
The image consists of about 10 000 galaxies within an area of about
one hundredth of the surface of the Full Moon.
Each of those galaxies contains from about 100 millions
to 100 billions of stars.
We live in one of some 80 billions of galaxies
that populate the Universe: the Milky Way.
In this video we will look at the various types of galaxies,
how to study them,
and how to understand their formation process.
Let's see how galaxies are characterised
through the Hubble sequence.
This is a sequence proposed by the American astronomer Edwin Hubble
at the beginning of the 20th century.
The Hubble Space Telescope and the Hubble law
were named after the same astronomer.
So Hubble established the evolutionary sequence
which in fact, as it will be shown later, is not evolutionary.
This is just a morphological sequence describing the galaxies.
There are essentially two types of galaxies:
elliptical and spiral galaxies.
In between, there is an intermediate type - the lenticular galaxies.
What is going on in this sequence?
The elliptical galaxies, as the name indicates,
have an elliptical form and they generally consist of old stars
with random orbits
around a common gravity centre.
"E" stands for elliptical, then there are 7 possibilities for the ellipticity.
The type of an elliptical galaxy can be written as E with an index n
that is equal to (1 - A/B ) * 10,
where A/B is the ratio of the semi-major axis
and the semi-minor axis.
The ellipticity 0 indicates a circular galaxy
while 7 inclides the most elliptical galaxies.
The spiral galaxies
form large spiral arms.
Those galaxies are seen face-on. Seen edge-on they would show a disk component.
Some examples will be shown in a moment.
There are two groups of spiral galaxies.
In general, S stands for spiral, then the indices a, b and c depend on
the importance of the bulge compared to the spiral arms of the galaxy
and the opening of the spiral structure.
Going form a to c there are less spiral arms
and they are less wrapped around each other.
Spiral galaxies,
as  was said before, have a bulge
that can be seen in the centre.
They also have a disk.
It is in the flat disk, seen face on here,
that the spiral arms form.
There is also a dark matter halo.
The elliptical galaxies as well have a halo
which by definition cannot be seen as it is formed of dark matter.
The halo will be discussed in the next videos.
The lenticular galaxies were also mentioned.
One can say that those are elliptical galaxies but possesing a disk
through which one can even see dust.
Those galaxies can be compared to the spiral galaxies
with a large bulge that has the size of an elliptical galaxy.
As it was said before, the Hubble sequence is not evolutionary.
Hubble created this sequence assuming that
galaxies form as elliptical galaxies,
then they evolve progressively toward galaxies with spiral arms
either wrapped around each other
or wrapped around a bar.
Here we show barred spiral galaxies,
they are named using a S for spiral,
B for barred and then the index a, b or c
which tells us how the spiral arms are wrapped around the bulge
and the bar in this case.
Back to the evolutionary sequence
which is not evolutionary
as the elliptical galaxies do not evolve into spiral galaxies,
as it was thought by Hubble.
This is a mere morphological sequence.
Be careful here, the Hubble sequence is a morphological sequence.
Here are some examples of various types of galaxies.
Starting with an elliptical galaxy that is quite featureless
surrounded by a group of other galaxies.
This particular galaxy
lies at the centre of a galaxy cluster in which the galaxies orbit
about a centre of mass.
Another example, this time a spiral galaxy, Messier 104
that is a magnificent example of a spiral galaxy Sa with a prominent bulge
that extends almost over the entire galaxy, a disk is seen inclined
in the line of sight and is materialized
by the line of dust across the galaxy.
As it was shown in the previous videos,
dust absorbs the background light.
This is the reason why one can see the stellar light
that is absorbed by the dust in the galactic disk.
Another fascinating spiral galaxy, Messier 101,
seen face on, with large spiral arms expanding from the centre
to the outer parts of the galaxy. One can clearly see the difference with Messier 104,
the bulge that this time is much smaller
as Messier 101 is a Sb type galaxy rather than Sa.
Finally, a barred spiral galaxy NGC 1300, and as its name indicates
it shows a bar that is placed
in the plane of the galactic disk. Like the disks,
bulges consists of stars, gas and dust.
Let's look in detail at the various types of galaxies.
Starting with the elliptical galaxies.
One can be seen here, in the centre of a galaxy cluster.
Quite often elliptical galaxies lie in the centre of a cluster, but not always.
What is the mass range of the elliptical galaxies?
Typically 10^7 solar masses for less massive,
up to 10^13 solar masses for the most massive galaxies.
The most massive elliptical galaxies often, but not always,
lie in the centre of a galaxy cluster.
They consist of old stellar populations,
i.e of the age of about billions of years.
There is little or no gas or dust,
so the interstellar medium is quite poor.
There is a little star formation,
stars are old with random orbits
around the centre of mass.
Taking the cross section of a galaxy
in such a way, one can define the light profile.
y axis represents the flux F, x axis the radius of a galaxy.
This is a typical light profile of an elliptical galaxy -
de Vaucouleurs profile,
after the astronomer that defined this profile.
The flux as a function of radius is equal to
a normalisation constant times exp - [ ( r / re )^1/4 -1 ].
This is a typical light profile of elliptical galaxies.
re is the effective radius,
i.e. the radius that contains half
the total light of a galaxy.
Let's take a look at the spiral galaxies.
In spiral galaxies
there is a disk and extending spiral arms.
Here we have a Sab galaxy, a type intermediate between a and b,
the galaxy Messier 101 seen face on.
The mass range is different for spiral galaxies.
The least massive spiral galaxies are more massive than
the least massive elliptical galaxies.
However, the most massive spiral galaxies are less massive than the most massive elliptical galaxies,
10^12 solar masses instead of 10^13 solar masses
as it was for elliptical galaxies.
The sizes are also valid for the elliptical galaxies,
even if the elliptical galaxies are in general a little bit larger,
i.e. about 40 kiloparsec in diameter.
This limit is not quite precise
as around the bulge and the spiral arms
there is a dark matter halo that is not visible
but the size of which can be estimated indirectly.
In spiral galaxies there is a lot of gas and dust
from which stars form.
There are young stellar populations
and a lot of star formation.
In fact, there are two components of the stellar populations.
The bulge consists of older, less massive stars,
the reddish colour implies that the peak in the black body
distribution is in the red part.
The spiral arms consist of young,
more massive stars that radiate in the blue part of the spectrum.
What is the light profile of spiral galaxies?
Let's take the cross section as before
and look at the luminosity profile
starting from the centre.
There would be two components.
The disk component curve, so, the flux as a function of radius,
is an exponential curve
F = F0 e^(-R/h),
where h is the characteristic height of the disk.
This is the luminosity profile of the galactic disk.
On this curve there will be superimposed the second component: the bulge.
Its profile is obviously the de Vaucouleurs profile,
the same that characterised elliptical galaxies
as it was seen before.
This is another spiral galaxy, this time seen edge on.
If one takes a cross section through the disk,
with the flux on the y axis and the radius on the x axis,
one will find the curve of the same type,
an exponential curve with h
as a caracteristic height.
Taking the cross section at this point, the resulting curve will be the sum of the de Vaucouleurs profile
that is characteristic for a bulge or an elliptical galaxy,
and a disk component.
In this case, the measurements are affected by dust
in the galactic plane. If our measurements were not affected by dust,
the luminosity profile of a spiral galaxy taken either perpendicularly
or along the disk would be an exponential function.
What are the means that can be used
to study those galaxies in details?
There are two ways: through spectra or imaging.
Starting with imaging. This is the bulge of a spiral galaxy
Messier 83, Sab galaxy.
This bulge is caracterised by the de Vaucouleurs luminosity profile.
Then, there is also a disk component with a fraction of dust
that is seen in absorption.
This is a false colour image
taken with three different filters.
The first one is the H-alpha filter that shows the gas
ionized by massive hot stars that are being formed.
If one is interested in the zones of the star formation
one should look at the red areas whose spectrum can be
presented on a diagram of the flux as a function of the wavelength.
Typical spectrum of those areas is the black body spectrum with the peak in the blue part
as young, hot, massive stars emit most of the radiation in the blue; then, here we would observe the H-α emission line.
This image was taken using three filters:
blue, intermediate colour and the H-α filter
that enables us to see these zones
that are of the size of the Strömgren sphere
which was presented in the lecture on the interstellar medium.
It is interesting to take a closer look at the Hα emission
of the gas ionized by young stars.
Previously, in the lecture concerning the colour-magnitude diagram
it was shown that the stellar populations can be characterised
by referring to the colour-magnitude diagram.
This can be done in the different parts of a galaxy,
for example in this area with some young stars.
Such a colour-magnitude diagram can be created
using very high resolution images
taken by the Hubble telescope, for example.
One places the flux and colour of all the stars
from a chosen area on the colour-magnitude diagram.
Then, the main sequence might be visible, maybe some other structure,
but in any case there is a possibility of characterising the stellar populations
that can be found in the marked area.
Proceeding in the same way for different regions in the galaxy,
it may be possible to trace back the history of galaxy formation,
in any case the history of evolution of the stellar populations in the galaxy.
All this thanks to some simple measurements of the flux and colour
of stars in various regions of the galaxy.
If the image is taken at lower resolution and the stars
cannot be resolved in those small areas,
it is no more possible to use this method.
In the previous image, a spiral galaxy
taken in three filters in the optical domain was shown.
Obviously, the observations can be made
at much wider range of wavelengths.
This is Messier 31,
the Andromeda galaxy in the ultraviolet
and in the infrared light.
One can see the spiral arms
and a part of the bulge but it is more interesting
to take a look at the spiral arms
that are well marked
by a great deal of bright points.
In the ultraviolet we can see
hot massive stars
that ionize the surrounding gas and so a lot of points can be seen
in the Hα emission, as it was shown before.
Looking at the far infrared image,
there is some dust and gas
concentrated in the galactic disk
of the spiral galaxy.
Dust absorbs photons
coming from hot stars
and then emits a modified black body spectrum
which peaks in the far infrared.
One can easily notice that observing in the ultraviolet or infrared
the same galaxy can give informations about various components.
In the former case one observes young hot massive stars in the process of formation,
in the latter case one can directly see the dust.
Obviously, both images are alike
as the stars heat the dust -
physically both components
are in the same place on the image.
However, the physical processes that are observed
are not the same.
A multiwavelength study of celestial bodies,
in particular the galaxies, enables us to characterise the stellar populations,
the gas contents, and to learn how those two elements are linked.
Until now, we only studied the images, but there is also another
important tool that can be used - the spectra.
Those can be used to measure the Doppler effect.
What can be seen here are the Dopper maps of some galaxies.
Colours indicate a radial velocity of the stars
as a function of the position in the galaxy.
The red colour indicates
the velocity that is directed away from us,
the blue colour indicates the velocity directed toward us.
Idem for this galaxy.
What can be measured is the velocity of the galaxy
as a function of the radius which in turn is used for
the estimation of the galaxy's mass.
This subject will be treated later.
We can write the acceleration of the points
along the rotation axis of a galaxy
as a function of mass.
We have G*M(r)/r²,
that is the gravitational acceleration is equal to v²/r.
This implies that v equals the square root of GM(r)/r.
One can see that if the velocity at each point
of the radius along the galaxy is measured
it is possible to calculate the mass within this radius.
Once more the Doppler effect turns out to be extremely useful,
this time it gives us the estimation of the mass of galaxies,
the mass of luminous matter as well as the mass of dark matter.
We have discussed various diagnostics during this lecture: imaging, spectra
and the morphological classification.
This morphological classification is not just to classify the objects
it is very useful to astrophysicists.
The morphological classification changes with the distance.
The distance is also the age of the Universe.
The Universe was created during the Big Bang,
it is expanding.
Galaxies further away from us are closer to the Big Bang epoch,
they are younger than the galaxies close to our own.
If we establish a morphological classification as a function of the distance,
in the same time we establish a morphological classification as a function of the age of the Universe.
Observing at various distances,
we observe different epochs of the Universe.
Here we have a morphological classification giving
the percentage of each type of galaxy in the local universe:
3% are elliptical galaxies,
15% are lenticular galaxies,
72% - spiral galaxies, the majority are spiral galaxies,
and 10% corresponding to galaxies that we are not able to classify.
This is one of the observational facts, another one tells us that
if the same observations are obtained for galaxies further away
the results are not the same. Previously there was 72% of the spiral galaxies
now the spiral galaxies represent only 31%.
The galaxies that are not classified represent 32% of the observed galaxies.
These are the galaxies that are
at a different evolutionary stage than in here.
Those morphological classifications can be established
as a function of distance regardless the theoretical tools
at our disposal used to understand the observations.
It is essential that those theoretical tools relate
at the same time the morphological classification as a function of the distance,
masses determined using the measures of the Doppler effect
and the rotational velocities of galaxies.
They also have to relate to the study of the stellar populations
that uses for example
the colour-magnitude diagrams of the resolved stars
from various regions in galaxies also as a function of the distance.
Currently, the studies of the formation
and evolutions of galaxies make great progress
from the theoretical as well as
observational point of view.
We have access to bigger and bigger telescopes
that enable us to study galaxies
which are further and further away, as the telescopes gather more and more light.
It is possible to study galaxies
with weaker and weaker intrinsic flux.
And it is not all. In addition to large telescopes
there are smaller ones that specialise
in detailed cartography of large fraction of the Universe,
maybe even the whole Universe.
It is possible to study large samples of galaxies
and with the obtained statistical properties, from the observational point of view,
and with progress in the data processing
and on the theoretical side as well,
one can create simulations of entire "chunks" of  Universe containing
billions of particles that are subject to gravitational forces,
pressure and even shock waves
created by supernovae explosions in galaxies.
It is now possible to confront theory and observations
and to draw some conclusions about the validity of theoretical models.
