Galaxies can be formed in various ways.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Hubble thought
that elliptic galaxies evolve into spiral galaxies
according to the morphological sequence.
As it was shown before, this sequence is incorrectly called “the evolutionary sequence”.
Now, it is known
that spiral galaxies
can become
elliptical galaxies
and vice versa.
Collisions of galaxies
may play a significant part,
but also that the amount of dark matter
and its kinetic properties
play a crucial role in the formation and future of a galaxy,
whatever its morphological type.
Indeed, the more the matter (dark or luminous)
is dynamically cold -
or the weaker the thermal agitation of particles within a massive object,
the larger its ability to collapse easily,
as we have seen through the Viriel theorem
and the Jeans criteria
so the colder the matter, the greater number of compact structures can be formed,
i.e. galaxies or galaxy clusters.
What can be seen in the video is a simulation
containing 33 millions of massive particles interacting with each other
in a piece of universe about 20 Mpc in size,
of which only the central Mpc is shown.
The particles represent the gas,
the stars and the cold dark matter,
but in the video only the gas is shown.
When the simulation starts at zero age,
the universe is almost homogeneous
but next to the slightly denser regions,
matter begins to collapse,
nodules and filaments appear.
In the centre of the image,
one can see a spiral galaxy being formed,
become stable for a moment - a few billion years
which is not an insignificant fraction
of the age of the Universe, which amounts to 13.7 billions of years.
Then, interactions with other galaxies
almost lead to its disruption while passing through the cluster.
Let's take the same simulation, zooming now
on the spiral galaxy that lied in the centre of the previous simulation.
On the left
the galaxy is shown face on while on the right, the same galaxy is shown edge on.
At the beginning the matter collapses
forming larger and larger clumps
resulting in the formation of a spiral galaxy
with a nice isolated disk
which stays stable for a moment
then partially destroyed
as a consequence of interactions with other galaxies.
Then, only the bulge of the galaxy remains
while passing through a galaxy cluster.
This video perfectly shows
a multitude of evolutionary scenarios for a galaxy, from the very formation
until its possible complete destruction.
Lets see now the extreme case of galaxy interactions.
In this simulation,
a spiral galaxy
is attracted into a potential well
materialized by the red point in the centre of the image.
The galaxy dives into the potential well
and the disk stars
from all sides of the bulge are dragged out then scattered.
Only the bulge
survives the interaction.
This video illustrates well
how a galaxy, here a spiral one,
is destroyed by the tidal forces
caused by the potential well,
and how the final product of the interactions
participates in the formation of, in this case,
a compact elliptical galaxy
from a bulge of a spiral galaxy.
This phenomenon is relatively fast,
it takes place in the simulation in about 1.5 billion years -
a little less than 10 percent of the age of the Universe.
A galaxy does not have to interact
with other galaxies in order to be destroyed.
In the regions (locally) dynamically colder than others,
matter may collapse
and form small nodules
which develop gravitational instabilities
that might result in the destruction of the galaxy.
It may occur even if a galaxy is completely isolated,
as shown in this simulation,
where the initial conditions
are those of an isolated disk of matter.
This condition does not prevent the galaxy from being disrupted
due to the gravitational instability.
