Hello everybody let's have a look on a couple of details of the process in a little deeper closer way.
It starts with this overall picture again, the first thing I will look at more detail as promised already is the base of evidence.
And I have already pointed out in the last video, the base of evidence actually is a big box of different analytical tools and steps to be done and let's have a closer look what belongs to it, I already pointed out in the last video a few differences or different aspects of the analysis there and actually we can follow up that further.
The first part, what should be done in a base of evidence is a kind of an outward-looking view, a view looking from the region to the outside to the rest of the world and particularly how the region is positioned within this global and competitive world.
It is a very statistic analysis, there's a lot of data available, we come back to the data in a later session and so we can base a lot of analytics and a lot of data in that part.
From the topics to be covered in that analysis, we can sort it in five topics here, it could be some more, some less if you want but we have to experience that these files are pretty much what is needed.
It is first a performance, you need to know what the region already achieves, we'll use it as a starting position (the values) of the region, the productivity, how strongly it grew lately and things like that.
Secondly, the industrial focus of course is very important for this smart specialisation strategy in knowing which areas, you have to know which areas the region is good.
Then in a world with more and more competition, it's getting more globalised all the time, competitiveness of the region as a whole but also with the key industries in that region is an important element in that analysis. But it's not only about the industries, which you need to look at, you also have to look at location factors, the conditions the economy faces within the regions.
They have topics like taxation, regulation, or accessibility of the regions but they also (start) the topics like quality of life or cultural
(availabilities) which need to be considered here and, of course, also natural resources, might it be in real resources, coal and steel, might it be in infrastructure or in connectivity assets like the possibility for a harbour city or might it be in natural resources in the sense that it's very good for recreational issues, mountains, a lake or things like that.
And, of course, smart specialisation is about innovation, new things, entrepreneurial activities.
So the innovation capacities, in the region, all those parts of the analysis, we will come back to that in more detail, remember this is for international comparison of the region, where the region stands but it's also part of that analysis. Now we call that often international benchmarking, this part of the analysis because benchmarking is the method you should apply here or one of the methods, the most important method to be applied here, benchmark the region with other regions, compare it with them.
And it certainly should be international today.
Competition is actually global and the competition between regions is not between two or three neighbouring regions, although there are some competition as well but to really know your competitive position in the world, you have to look internationally.
If you want to characterise that part of the analysis, we often put it as it is a kind of a helicopter view of the region, it gives you the broad overall picture in the region, it also shows you the surrounding, the setting the region is in and it is a bit of a neutral overall look on the region.
In the next step, that will be a little bit different.
The next step still draws on data and on statistics a lot but it focuses much more on the region itself.
It goes much more into detail of the region and one reads that is a separate step is that often data which is available for international comparison is not as detailed as the data which is available if you only look particularly at your own region and we (inaudible) of course make use of these available information.
The topics you are keeping yourself busy with is that part of analysis are actually not that much different from the part of the international analysis but instead of getting a broad over view, here you really go into the details and try to understand in detail what is behind these figures.
Again industrial structures is an important issue here, look at the details of the industries, you might internationally recognise you have a very strong pharmaceutical industry but when you look into the details you probably can find out, is it headquarter or is it research or maybe it's the production side of this industry which is important for you, which of course the end of (discretion) has very different implications for the strategy building.
Clusters are an important part of regional economic development by now, it is very well established that clusters can add quite a bit to regional values.
Therefore they are also the starting point for new specialisations not the clusters themselves but they might provide input so part of the individual analysis of the region is also an analysis of available clusters.
And clusters is not only concentration, concentration is something you already look at industrial details but a cluster is defined as a concentration combined with activities of working together with an organisation and network or another kind of a
structure and these can, of course, build a starting point.
And again the regional innovation system is important and particularly not the system only by itself, the number of universities and so on but also if it fits well,
(inaudible) structures do the focus of the innovation system, the good faculties of the university, for example or the independent research companies, do they fit together with the industrial structure or not and actually if tree answer is not, it might be part of this smart specialisation strategy to achieve a better fit here, to find new connections between the innovation system and the economic structure.
As we've said, we know already a lot about the region but not everything.
There are things which are not visible in statistics and that is why also a contextual analysis should be part of the base of evidence analysis.
Here we look beyond statistics to test the knowledge of the region and particularly one area which we often have to look on is the political environment the region is living in, the governance of the region itself, of course, what are the region strategies, has it policies which might influence their economic strategy but also the broader economic environment like national framework conditions what it can be used for that.
That is something you don't find in statistics but, of course, it's very important to understand the region.
The next step is something we already discussed but it is at that moment in the analysis, it has to move into the picture.
It is the global mega-trends in the general purpose technology and the questions how do they influence the regional assets which we already analysed in the first three steps here.
What is really the impact of these trends and the possibilities of these technologies for the regional economies or the assets and structures.
So it's kind of, after doing the analysis once, you look at the global mega trends and the general purpose technology and find out where in the region do they influence that.
From all these analytical steps, we get a lot of information altogether and they have to bring that together now to find out the… to condense that to an overall picture and that is actually what a swot analysis does, the strengths and weaknesses, the chances and the threats for the region that is the real output of all this kind of analysis and brings it all together.
All this builds the base of evidence and you've probably noticed that it is very similar to other strategies, it is not really particular to smart specialisation strategy but if you do a detailed economic strategy for a region, you will do exactly these steps to build it.
What is really new about smart specialisation is what comes after building a base of evidence but without that base probably you won't be successful in smart specialisation strategy.
