After the base of evidence let's look in another part in more detail and from the graphical representation of the process we have already seen here that base of evidence, on the one hand, and the analysis of the entrepreneurial resources, on the other hand, are going together into the dialogue and interactions.
But let's look in a bit more detail in the interplay between these three parts.
In this process there are actually two ways how it could be organised.
Any of all drawing of the process we've drawn it like it is represented here with the two arrows going towards the dialogue and interactions.
It could actually be called a kind of a bottom-up tactic of the process.
On the one hand we have the base of evidence.
The base of evidence provides us with a lot of information of the economy and provides us with areas which have potential for change, it might be that they are in need for change, it might be under pressure, economic pressure, but it could also be it's already a successful area in the economy but still has potential for an even further step change in the future, even increasing that success more.
On the other hand we have the analysis of entrepreneurial resources and that provides us, completely independent from the areas of need, with a list of all entrepreneurial activities, projects, people, available resources for entrepreneurship, which is available within the region.
And then independently from these two information in the dialogue and interactions part, it is that we combine these two information to identify our priority areas.
Then we have to ask questions like: are there enough innovation activities in a possible area in need or in the potential to change to achieve finally the scale necessary really to have structural change.
Are there sufficient starting points in the economy for entrepreneurial activities which we observed to build one of the priority areas and to really be able to get in a leadership position in these priority areas, and then from that discussion you define the priority areas.
Organising the process in this bottom-up fashion is actually the theoretically optimal way to do it.
It is that what the theory of smart specialisation would really say how to do it.
The advantage is that it's most flexible because you do the two analytical steps independently from each other, they don't influence each other, and there's not a danger of missing important opportunities, particularly out of the entrepreneurial side which you might miss if you don't do that analysis independently of the economic structure.
But they are of course also some disadvantages of this process.
There might be an information overflow actually because there might be many entrepreneurial activities and very difficult then to sort them and to find all of them actually.
There is a high level of coordination necessary.
This high governance difficulties probably.
And it might be dangerous that pressure groups push the process (to us to stay) interested as there is no pre-defined direction and might end up capturing the process.
The alternative organisation of the process could be called a more top down approach and you see that the flow of information is quite different in this case.
You do the base of evidence analysis in a first step, and that provides us again this area, this potential for change, and also provides as in this case these areas, these chances for innovation or competitiveness games.
These areas are now pre-defined and then given to the analysis of entrepreneurial resources, and entrepreneurial resources analyses focus on the areas which had been identified in the base of evidence analysis already as potential areas, and just looks for entrepreneurial activities, entrepreneurial projects fitting within these areas.
That makes it much easier of course to identify the appropriate activities, but you might miss good chances by that because if you have a large number of entrepreneurial activities, but they don't fit in one of the priority areas, you will miss that.
And then after the analysis of the entrepreneurial activities, then we go back to the dialogue and interaction section and actually the step then is not as important as it is in the other case because here we then particularly ask the question does the areas we identified with potential for change and the entrepreneurial activities that fit to these areas, do they have this size and the right potential to really generate externalities and the scales necessary to lead to structural change?
The danger of organising a process in this way is of course that you miss important information as you limit already the analysis of the entrepreneurial activities.
And again it might be dangerous that interest groups push already for priority areas and then limit the entrepreneurial resource analysis just to the areas of interest, so here again there are some governance issues.
In reality usually we will have a mix of both, and you should keep in mind the properties of that so that you can find the optimal mix which is for your own region, which also depends on structures and governance capacities available which process, or if your processes more going towards the top down or more towards the bottom-up approach.
Let us a last point for that video, have a look on a kind of wording issue, because we talk about smart specialisation strategy or the process of smart specialisation, and we also talk about entrepreneurial discovery and these two are actually not much different.
An entrepreneurial discovery process is as it is for smart specialisation, an analytical process, it needs analytical foundation, it needs a definition of a priority area and then includes a number of projects in these priority areas interacting with each other, working together to generate at the scale and externalities necessary to really do the step change for the structural change in the economy.
But an entrepreneurial discovery process is the definition of one priority area, while a smart specialisation strategy has a number of priority areas and it also has the monitoring enablation phase which is not really entrepreneurial discovery.
So, smart specialisation strategy is actually a collection of results of entrepreneurial discovery processes which each leads to one priority area.
You could also say smart specialisation is a kind of portfolio management of entrepreneurial discoveries for one region.
Let's recapture quickly what the process would look like.
We looked in the first video of that session, we discussed the complete process, in the second video now we looked at a couple of more details.
Let's go through the most important elements again just to recap them.
The first step we pointed out as an important element is the definition of the region.
It is about identifying your identity.
Be sure of who you are, be sure what you talk about, and although it's not really part of the theoretical concept, it is really essential that the strategy is successful, that you agree on one definition, there might be already one, then it's fine, but it might also be necessary to do that as a first step.
The second important element is the base of evidence: identify your needs.
Where is the potential for structural change?
And where is the need for structural change?
The next step, or the next element, the analysis of entrepreneurial resources.
Identify your opportunities.
What are the chances you face?
What can you do with the entrepreneurial assets in the region?
What are the opportunities?
Then dialogue and interaction are the next essential element.
Identify the promising combinations.
Bring the information from different areas you created before, you analysed before, together to really identify your combinations which might be most promising for you.
Then define your priority areas.
It's like identify your focus.
Where do you want to focus on?
You can't focus on everything, you should not focus only on one thing but identify the areas you want to focus on.
Then of course in the focus area, in the priority areas, you have to define projects which interact with each other, create networks, platforms, invest in
R&D collaborations, all of these kinds of things, it's like identify your activities, identify what you want to do.
Last not least, don't forget to monitor and if necessary adapt your strategy.
At each different step, where this is possible, it could be said identify what works.
And if it doesn't work, change something, and if it still doesn't work probably you have to drop a priority area.
That can happen. Smart specialisation is about entrepreneurship, entrepreneurial discovery.
Entrepreneurial discovery is a discovery process, you can be successful with it but you might also fail, this is why you should not only have one priority area but look at several, and you should monitor that you recognise in time if it works or not, not to waste more investment.
The seven elements presented in the last slide, these are essential for a smart specialisation strategy, you need them really, but even one step further, we also provided more individual steps for such a strategy.
They are maybe not all of them essential, but if you follow them, you cover all important areas.
You might have to focus more on one, than another, but still you will cover all areas which might help in building such a strategy.
Thank you for the moment.
Thank you for this session, and in the next session we will look into more detail into the tools available for these steps, and particularly available for analysing the base of evidence.
Thank you.
