Welcome back everybody.
In this session we will have a look at the tool box.
You will see a few examples of tools which we can use when do the analyse the base of evidence.
The first step is to remember why we are doing this at all.
The base of evidence is the foundation of the complete strategy, we need to know exactly what we are building on, on what we can rely on.
And that's what the SWOT analysis provides us with the strengths and weaknesses of the region we can build on, but furthermore the available resources and existing specialities in the regions, these are our departing points for further smart specialisation, so this is also something which should come out of the base of evidence, but even one step further the analysis should also provide us with first ideas of possible priority areas, of areas of interest for a change.
Might it be that they need to change, or might it be that the change generates more dynamics in this area.
That's also part of what the base of evidence should tell us, or the analysis underlying it should tell us, potential priority areas.
But there is even one step more, it's not only about identifying priority areas.
The goal is that these priority areas and the activities resound in the step change for the whole economy, that they have a critical mass, or generate a critical mass, they provide externalities and transformative activities so that they get a
structural change in the complete economy, and again the analysis we do when we build the base of evidence should provide us with some information if this is possible in the potential priority area.
Before going into the tools available, let's quickly recap what questions we would like to answer.
Which industries which sectors or activities are important for the region?
What are the drivers of the regional economy?
Are these industries competitive in the international competitive environment?
Or are they only locally focused so they are not exposed to competition?
What's the future potential of these industries?
Are they in a growing area or in a decreasing market?
Do we already identify key sectors, or unique combinations or clusters in the region which we can build on?
And how is the location quality in the region?
And does it relate well to what we found (inaudible)?
Are classes supported by the right quality factors in the region, or do they not fit together?
As much specialisation is a lot about innovation and change, of course the innovation capacities are very important, what are available in the region? and how does the regional innovation system work? should be answered.
And last not least how do megatrends and general purpose technology influence the results we found (inaudible) what do they mean for the future perspective of the focus areas of the region industries?
Now did I bore you with these questions a little bit?
I hope so because that should be already clear that that's what needs to be answered.
Now let's have a look at how we can answer that.
Instead of now going directly to the tools I would like to try to structure the further process a little bit.
We at (inaudible) developed a regional profile toolbox which should help to have more structure in the analysis.
It's actually based on three pillars, what we call performance attractiveness and structural potential.
The performance is the part looking backwards.
It looks at what has been achieved until now, where is the region today? and of course as trends often go on longer, it is often an indicator what the region might be developing to.
The second pillar, the attractiveness, looks at the location conditions of the region, how is the region positioned in a competitive world: is it attractive for companies? is it attractive for certain industries? is it attractive for people, particularly for highly qualified people?
And finally the third pillar, the structural potential, we want to have a look into the future, but not in the sense of a forecast, but in a sense of potential of development.
Therefore we analyse the economic structure and look what potential is inherent in these structures.
But this is not only a
structure for the analysis, it's also that we build indicators for each of these three pillars, they allow a quick overview of the results of that pillar.
But of course there's a lot of underlying analysis and data and that drill down possibilities into all these indicators until very detailed levels.
But let's see how really works in reality.
The first example is the performance index, reflecting the economic performance of the region.
An example taken is actually for the canton of Ticino as
I announced before we have many examples for Ticino so is this one.
And Ticino is doing quite well in the economic performance, you can see that in this index.
The index is constructed in a way that one hundred equals the western European average, and with a value of above
110 Ticino is doing better than the western European average, and actually doing quite substantially better as a difference of ten points means one standard variation, and so the medium variations on the average of all
European regions, so
Ticino is even better than the western European average than one standard variation, and you can also see that if you compare it to the benchmarking regions, also given in the chart, Ticino is in quite a leading position, all the other Swiss regions are actually doing better.
Of course a performance index is only a very brief overview but gives a first insight into the development of the region, to understand that in more detail you have to drill down much for more in the data, and that's what we will do in the next few slides and examples.
Of course it won't be possible to do the complete analysis here, that would overstretch the videos quite a bit.
But in the reading materials you have the example of the analysis we did for Ticino, there are many more examples of graphics and analytics in there.
And actually even there in the report not everything was done in the analytical phase, before to report we did much more and selected to analysis which are interesting.
But here I really have to focus on a very few examples illustrating that, and the next example will really show how much deeper into the details we can go.
In this example we look at the details of the industry
structure and actually it looks at the whole of the industry of the canton of Ticino.
It compares these industries with the same industries in other regions.
And the first thing we see is that the whole of the sector is fairly important in Ticino as the horizontal axis which provides the share of this sector within the complete economy, only central Switzerland has a higher share, all other regions have the same or a lower share.
We also see that the wholesale trade is a quite successful sector in
Ticino it had not the top growth but it is among the stronger growing regions in the last ten years.
So it's a sector which has some potential and some importance for Ticino and could be analysed so for smart specialisation strategy.
The third example moves away from the economic structure now and looks at the location quality, and this time the example is not for
Ticino but for Brussels.
We have a number of locations sectors reflected in that
chart, and again we compare that to do western European average of all regions which equals again one hundred.
We also observe here how the
 structure changed, what did
Brussels achieve over this period of six years from 2006 to 2012?
And if you look at the details, there is particular manpower taxation where
Brussels performs first in the western European average and actually only improved very slightly since 2006.
By the way the indicators defined are defined in a way that lower values reflect what is less attractive for economic activities, so higher taxes have lower values in that chart and vice versa.
But Brussels also has a couple of strengths.
Particularly in the accessibility, which is one of the strength of Brussels which actually improved, at least at a continental level, over time.
And also in the area of innovation, the Shanghai index which measures the university quality and the (inaudible) density and the patent density are rather good in Brussels.
So Brussels is positioned quite well with its location factors and also not only for administrative work like the EU, but also for innovative industries, as you can see on the innovation indicators.
The fourth example now goes further down into the analysis, it drills down further into details.
It's what we call the capacity to compete.
The idea here is that the industries have to compete on interregional and international markets, and we want to know how competitive they are as an indicator for the possible future success.
You see from that description that is part of the
structural potential pillar of the analysis.
Now first of all we have to know which industries do compete interregionally and internationally.
It's not only the industries which exports their product.
It can also be industries with produce for the regional market that could potentially be replaced by imports to these market so that they also face the international interregional competition.
That's true for most of the producing industries of the secondary sector, but it also is true for quite some services for example tourism, in the financial sector, or in the wholesale trade.
Now let's look at the result of this example again, which is again for the canton of Ticino.
We first had a look on the share of the export-oriented industries, and is given again on the horizontal axis, and we see that wholesale trade is very important, the sector we already analysed before in the example, but also medical profession and optimal instruments for example, or chemicals and pharmaceuticals.
But now we also need a measure of the competitiveness of these industries on the inter regional and international markets.
And we do that by the productivity as an indicator for competitiveness, which is readily available, it's not the optimal indicator of course, but it is the one which is internationally comparable.
And here we see that the picture changes somewhat, these particular textile and fashion industries which is very productive in Ticino compared to other regions in Europe, it has actually three times the productivity of the other regions, that's what two hundred percent mean.
So although this industry is rather small in the Ticino economy, it contributes a lot to the competitiveness of the industry overall, that is given by the size of this figure.
The other very important industry and it's also the reason we looked at it in more detail before, is the wholesale industry.
It is more competitive, it has a higher productivity than the average European region, but is not as far up as the textile industry, but he has a very big share in the economy, so therefore it's important, it is very important as well.
There is also one industry which had a negative contribution to competitiveness, and its hotels and restaurants.
If you know the Ticino economy a little bit you know this is an area where Ticino really faces difficulties.
And it's now a question for a smart specialisation strategy if a step change in a transformation in that sector could be possible or if the potential is higher to increase the wholesale sector's success.
These few examples gave an impression but it's possible for the outside part of the evidence base analysis.
Of course there is much more to be done and much more tools and analysis to be used to really get there, much more than I can introduce in such a short time.
I did give you an impression, first of all that there might be a structure, we propose a structure of potential attractiveness and performance, but other structures can be chosen as well, and that there are drill down possibilities, you start with an overview analysis, and then drill down further into areas of interest, where they show up that there might be potential then you go further.
Now what does the outward looking analysis provide us with?
It is the foundation, of course, of the complete strategy, without it it's not possible to formulate a successful strategy, or just accidentally but not systematically. It focuses on the relative position of the region, compares the region inter regionally and internationally and reflects global competition thereby.
And it's that part of the analysis where the most tools are available and the most standardised structures can be used to analyse it has been done often.
In the next part of this session we will see how that can be more drilled down to the region, more an inward view which goes into more details of the region, and I'm looking forward to see you back for that second part of this session, thank you.
