Welcome back to the second part of the session.
When in last part we focused on the outward view of the evidence-based, this time we will look more into the inward side of the analyse.
Let's look first what are the main characteristics again of this inward view.
We will focus on the individual region and really going to the specific and details of those regions and not look that much on the competitive position.
There are a number of consequences of this feature.
There are analytical tools of course available for this kind of analyse but it is much less standardised than in the outward view.
We need to look more at a specific need, into specific
characteristics of the regions and adapt our analyse to this.
Still the focused area of the analyse are not that much different from the outward analyse.
We again look at the industry
 structure, that's in a much more detailed way.
We will keep us busy with clusters and we will look at the regional innovation system in more detail.
But let's go into some examples.
The examples provided in the following for analyses on the inside view are much more of an illustrative
character than they have been for the outside view.
But for the outside view there's a relatively structured process.
For the inside view we have to look much more on the
characteristics and individual properties of a region and adapt the analyse according to it.
Still, the examples, which I again take in from the
Canton of Ticino, do provide a couple of interesting insight and how such an analyse can be conducted.
Actually the first example already points to a very important issue.
In a discussion, I pointed out that the different steps of the analyse, for example the industry structure and the innovation system, can't be seen all completely separately but have to interact with each other.
And that is well something, precisely, this example does.
It analyses if the industry structure and innovation system are harmonised, if they work together well or if they do not.
We measure here, with an RTA index, a Relative
Technological Advantage index, the importance of different fields of the industry, by gross value added actually, and the importance of the innovation system in that field by the patents intensity actually.
And we can see that, for
Ticino, there are in a number of industry's areas, this fit is quite well.
For example the chemical raw materials or the pharmaceuticals, in both cases the concentration index is higher than in Western
European average, and pretty close to each other actually, (inaudible).
So the Ticino innovation system is focused in the same areas as the industry in Ticino is.
But that is not true for all industries.
For example in the electrical engineering Ticino is quite focused in this area, in the industry side.
But the innovation system, measured by the patents here, does not reflect that.
So here probably we don't have that much innovation capacities to support that industry.
And all this is relative.
Of course some industries, like, for example pharmaceutics, produce much more patents than for example electrical engineering.
But all of these measures are relative to Western
European averages, so the relative patent intensity in
Ticino is lower than in other regions.
But their relative industry share is higher and therefore that does not fit together perfectly.
Which might of course be a possible approach for a smart innovation strategy.
If you find innovative activities which can push the research side of the electrical engineering industry, that could create the transformative action for these industry possibly.
But we're still in the statistic analyses, not in the project of priority area definition.
But it might be a possible point to follow up.
The next example shows how the analyse from the outward side can be driven down in much more detail by the inward analyse, inward looking analyse.
From the outward analyse we know that the life science industries, one of the focus areas of the Ticino industry.
But let's get in, somewhat, deeper into it.
Although Ticino is one region, it has several sub-regions which can be analysed separately and that's the first thing which was done in this example.
We see the life, the location quotient of the life science industry in this 5 sub-regions of Ticino, and we clearly see although it is rather high in nearly all of these regions, it is very much concentrated in one region particularly.
Even going into more details we can look at the municipalities the life science industry is located in.
And we see that by the dots on the graph, that it is really focused very much in a fairly small area of the region.
So here really some cluster features appear.
Furthermore it's a callous demonstrate, it is not only one part of that industry, but if you look at production, trade with this goods and research separately, you see that particular production and trade are closely related, and their many activities in this area also quite substantial by the size, reflected by the size of the bullets.
Which is less prominent is divide spots which reflect the research side.
And there are also not really located in the middle of the cluster but a little bit further out, although the distances are not far, there might be some potential again here for more research driven parts.
But again we're not at the point of that finding priority areas yet.
That is still the statistically analyse and we have to check if we find project which have the potential to increase the research side of the life science industry which might then help to complete cluster.
This last example's focus on the research network of the region of Ticino.
Actually we used again patent data, joint patent applications, to see where are research cooperation with other regions and Ticino.
What we observe is that
Ticino has quite a number of corporations but most of them are focused on a geographically fairly near base to Ticino itself.
Most of the corporations have a Swiss origins or this is northern Italian origins.
There are less further away corporations like with London or the States, although there are some.
For the smart specialisation strategy development, that is a hint that probably we can use research potential, some closer by regions quite well, as these corporations work well.
But on the other hand also project improving their further away connections, if they are useful for the local industry, might be an option.
Again we are not in the area of defining priorities now. But still in the analytical area.
The defining of priorities needs more inputs.
And that's what I want to look at next.
Up to now, the examples that I provided work the statistics.
But as we recall from the process, there's also a contextual part of the base of the evidence analyses which is not based in statistics, where we go beyond statistics.
In that part we have to access the knowledge of people.
People in the region, but they also, maybe be outside the region, access their knowledge and access their ideas and their information to include them in the analyse.
This of course is the most complex part, probably, of the analyses.
But at the same time it's the less standardised part.
Therefore we can't provide many tools here, but we will see in a later session an example how that might look like in a region and how may that might be organised.
But there are few principles which we can follow in that part of the analyses.
It should be interactive.
We should talk to the people, we have to talk to the people.
But we also might need to go back to them again, with new ideas and re-ask them certain questions to really get all information which is available.
And it does an explanatory process.
We don't up ahead exactly know where it will lead.
There might be some misleading parts.
But in the end you have to follow the map to find out if they are misleading or not and you'll find very useful parts by doing so.
Secondly it is very regional focused.
It is not about international competition and comparison and benchmarking.
It's really going into the details of the region, actually also into details of certain areas which might be priority areas later, or even already to individual projects.
Also at that part of the analyse, we're not really looking at projects, these information, these bits and bytes of information, which in the beginning might not be really connected, might be important in the end for the
structural analyse, for the base of evidence to have that really complete.
And thirdly this part of the analyse can't be done by administrative people only alone or by researchers alone.
It is actually about talking to people.
That administrative part is only coordinating all the information.
But you need to talk to people in innovative firms, you need to talk to researchers, in universities or other institutions.
You need to talk to inventors and investors into regions, and innovators, to all these kinds of people.
But you also need to talk to policy makers.
What are they up plans, what are their views on this.
You probably also need to talk to senior administrative people to really get a complete contextual picture of the region.
With that, we have seen examples of the most parts of the base of evidence analyse.
So we should be able to follow that up.
In the next few sessions we will also have a few examples how that really works but we now know a little bit about a toolbox and how to use it.
So looking forward to see you again in the next session.
Thank you.
