Welcome again. Today, we're going to have a closer look at the data.
We already saw, in the last session how the data can be used, what are the analytical tools we can use with the data.
But today we'll look a little bit more in what sources of data are available.
And what are the properties the data needs to have to be valuable for analysis.
As we know from earlier discussion smart specialisation is based on facts and therefore all the data is required.
But the analysis we want to conduct is very demanding on the data.
It has to have certain properties so that the analysis is valid and valuable at the end.
The most important properties are these that cover the relevant topics reflecting the economic and the industry structure of course
But also looking at the quality of the location and of innovation resources available in the region.
Because all that is an important part of smart specialisation.
The data also has to be very differentiated and detailed.
Smart specialisation is a strategy not looking at the industry level but at the sub-industry stage where things really happen in a smart specialisation.
And to really have the right inputs from the data analysis the data of course needs all  that to reflect the sub-industry stage of the economic structure as well.
Furthermore, the data has to cover the region we want to analyse.
We pointed out before in the discussion how important it is to define the region consistently and to create a commitment towards the region.
But if the data doesn't cover that region then of course the analysis is only of a limited value to the strategy building and it might also be bad for the identification of the region.
Finally, the data should be internationally comparable and of course have an international coverage.
Global competition today is what is really facing regions and just a national data analysis would not really reflect that global competition for the region and therefore be again only of limited value in a smart specialisation strategy building process.
Now all these demanding properties for the data makes it clear that it is not so straightforward and there are not so many data sources available for this
Actually you need to combine various data sources to get at those goals anyway.
But there's one data source which we developed at BAK Basel as we do that kind of analysis for many years for regions it is just that properties which follows this database which might be quite useful.
And I will introduce that database and its properties and its coverage in the next few slides to you.
Of course you can also use it as a database, but it might be easier and more efficient  to use the existing one than to combine others but I will come back to that at the end.
This database, the BAK Regional 
Economic Database is explicitly built to support regions as a key player in economic development.
Most other databases focusing on national level and only have a derivative regional coverage are not really focused on the needs of the regions.
In this database it is really the regions we look at and the information is supposed to be useful for regions.
We also take of course a global perspective and the perspective of international competition.
It is always the international few and the comparison of the region which is of interest to us.
Actually, benchmarking is the essential tool we use there and until recently actually the database was called International
Benchmarking Database.
We just renamed it to Regional
Economic Database because we think region is the important property of the database and not the benchmarking which is nestled behind it.
But still benchmarking is also learning from the best that is also what you can do with that database.
What do other regions do and how successful are they with what they do can be analyzed there.
It covers the relevant topics, economic performance location quality and innovation capacities, and all that together then builds the Regional Economic
Database, powered by BAK Basel.
Now what are the properties of this database?
As we are interested in regions, of course the first important part is the geographical coverage of the database.
At the core of the database we focus on OECD countries, the most developed industrialized countries as the benchmarking sample for the regions we are interested in here but the structures of the database are easily expandable so other countries can be covered there as well.
But of course countries are only geographic coverage, the core interest is on regions
And within the 24 countries which are included in the database at the moment, there are more than
1100 regions covered in the database.
And this is only the lowest level, of course we can aggregate further regions out of these 1100 individual regions.
And this is what we call flexible geographies within the database and also provided by the example here.
This actually is the metropolitan region of Hamburg and if you know Hamburg the administrative region of the city of Hamburg is rather small and that's actually a Bundesländ in Germany so from an administrative level it's a very divided functional region the metropolitan area of Hamburg
In most German data you will only find the Bundesländer while our database allows you to flexibly define what is the metropolitan area 
Hamburg.
In that graph you see 3 different examples but of course there are more possible and that you can work with this definition.
And the structure of the database the consistency and all the data is complete allows you really to be very flexible within the geographic definitions.
Any combination can be used and can be analyzed into all details.
In this graph you see a quick overview of the countries which are covered  and the number of regions in the individual countries
I leave that to you for further or detailed analysis and like to move on to the sector coverage.
Regions are very important in the database, but actually for smart specialisation it is important to have a detailed industry data available because you want to go beyond the usual industry level like car manufacturing or trade and go into more details
Within our regional economic database we cover at the lowest level, 115 individual industries.
The definitions are based on the international ISIC classification which is quite common  and also the
European definitions are based on the ISIC with very small variations which helps to compare it with external data if necessary.
Within  these 115 industries we usually use the 2 digit ISIC classification is so-called but in the production sector we consider that very important for the economic development and also very important for smart specialisation we also cover the so-called 3 digit level of the ISIC classification.
So in the production sector we are even more detailed while in the service sector the level of detail is a little bit less.
It is very interesting with that database that we can also go beyond the ISIC classification of course.
You see that in the example here for the Life Science Industry.
The Life Science Industry as it is defined here, consists of the pharmaceutical industry, that's fairly straightforward but then there is the manufacture of medical instruments or of electro medical instruments.
These are different industrial areas in the ISIC classification they are not just next to pharmaceuticals and usually it is difficult to analyse them together but we can do that.
But even more, there is also a service part related to the
Life Science Industry, and it is the research in biotechnology that's also part of the Life Science
Industry but in the usual structure of economic analysis part of the services within our database, it is possible to create such a Life Science aggregate and analyse the Life Science Industry, and that is only one example of many
Which are possible.
Now of course it is very important what indicators are covered within the database. and it is a kind of two split database, the core part is what we call economic performance which really looks at economic indicators and then we also have location factors, I'll come back to that in a minute but let's stay for the moment with the economic performance.
The structure of the database and the definition is based on the system of national accounts. so that guarantees and helps to have all the data internationally comparable if at some point we need to do adaptions to that we did that so really all data in the database is internationally comparable.
The two key indicators in the database are GDP, or if you look at an industry level value added, which is the same concept and employment, of course.
But there are a number of further indicators a number of calculated indicators from these key figures like working hours labour costs, unit labour costs productivity very important in the competitive analysis
GDP per capita and so on and so forth.
The database also has various prices and currencies within the database though for example of course we look at real anomaly developments but you can also use purchasing power, parities or current exchange rate, you can have the data in different kinds of currencies with Francs, US Dollars or Euros or any other you are interested in.
So it is very flexible and complete from that perspective.
In the example here you see a drawing for another region for Villa Manin, it's a Euroregion and actually a cross border region so you can see how flexibly we can build these kind of analysis and you can see the GDP the productivity and the employment growth for this cross border region.
I already mentioned that the database also includes location factors.
Of course while the economic performance based on the system of national accounts is very much harmonizing, the national lean only needs small adaptions to be comparable, that's not true for location factors.
There are many differences in international measurement and the way the location factors are defined.
But what we do in the databases, the location factors we include, we guarantee that they are internationally comparable and we also usually have quantitatively comparable location factors with a quantitative measure behind them.
Or we use qualitative measures but then put them through in depth processes that are similar to a quantitative measure. 
So the location factors which are in the database can be internationally compared and can be quantitatively compared with each other to define the position of the region
It includes the most important location factors, particularly so-called hard factors like taxation regulation, labour markets, diggers availability of qualified labour force and so on.
But we also look at softer factors if possible of course quantification is more difficult yes but for example the quality of life is one factor which we are looking at.
Finally there's a special focus on all innovation related location factors so that this important part of smart specialisation is all covered in the database to the best possible extent.
Again it is very important that all this is  broken down to the regional level if appropriate but there are also some national figures in if they drive the regional economy like national regulation is of course relevant for the regional economy as well but usually like in tax levels or inaccessibility we look at the regional level for the location factors as well.
Furthermore on the indicator side we not only have what we might call the the raw information which I presented up till now but there are also quite a number of summarizing information which makes the database more easily accessible but then always has the drill down possibility into the details.
One of them is summarized indexes which I already introduced last week in one of the examples, the performance index attractiveness or structural potential indexes.
And there are various ready to use new industry definitions, I showed one in the example before the Life
Science Industry but there are quite some more which can be used in the analysis and they can also be easily built and then incorporated on a regular basis into the database.
And we also have predefined sets of benchmarking regions.
Who do we compare with?
We can compare with an average of all regions for example but we can also look for a region with strong financial sectors we can pick all the other financial sector regions.
Or for a harbor and trade city we could pick all the other regions with harbors and trade activities.
And there are a number of sets already defined of regions with common properties which built the right benchmarking samples.
Now summing up what are the key advantages of our database and what properties of other data sources should we follow as well if they are valid for the analysis of the smart specialisation strategy.
The extended regional and the extended industry coverage is a very important habit particularly because it goes across this many numbers of indicators.
You can of course find other databases which go into the same regional detail maybe even more and you can find databases which have even more detailed industry coverage, but usually you don't find that combined.
And particularly then you can't compare that internationally.
One thing that I didn't mention yet is the coverage over time of the database.
This is actually a database of annual data, starting in '95 of the last century and going currently until 2015 so it covers 20 years.
And usually the database is expanded around the middle of the year to cover the last year so the information is quite up to date compared with other sources.
The complete database is consistent and balanced.
That means that many combinations are possible and you don't get missing data or not working because of missing data or some small parts of it.
So you really have the consistency and the balanced properties of the database which allows you a flexible analysis.
And then the already mentioned summary indexes are quite valuable for the analysis and as well as the new industry structures and the facts of benchmarking regions.
If you are interested in more details we are happy to provide them there is also a web page of course where you can find all that kind of information.
Now I introduce our own database and the properties of it which shows what is possible but also there are some limits to it
Of course you can use other databases as a data source and actually we did that in building that database.
We didn't do any primary research but we used various different databases to get our internationally consistent and complete database together as well as a couple of statistical and economical tools to fill the gaps.
But you could go directly to the original databases and particularly with the regional accounts is one of the most important sources for us and that could be a first source of access for you as well.
And if you are only interested in
Europe and not look at the global competition but focus on Europe you will start of course as an important source for data.
And both of these sources are more on the economic performance side and for the innovation side of the smart specialisation analysis always the patent databases ones of or again if you look more at Europe it's the European Regional
Innovation Scoreboard which might be a very useful source.
All this data, our own database which I introduced but also these sources I named until now, they are more suited for the part of the evidence base which is international benchmarking setting the position of the region in the international setting.
For going into more details you have to go into more detailed national statistics which cover the regions.
There's of course national accounts and regional accounts production accounts as possible sources.
Most of what is available at that level is included actually in our international database so that we would give too much additional information, but particularly labour force survey or business righteousness
These are the sources providing very detailed information on the industry structure within a country and within your region then as well so they should be accessed for that.
And then there are many other sources, there might be regional cluster maps or cluster atlases cluster lists which you can use and so on and so forth
That then really depends on your individual region.
Summing up data is an essential input for developing a smart specialisation strategy, without data it will be very difficult if not impossible to realign such a strategy
There are numerous data sources which can be explored but most of them are not detailed enough for the kind of analysis which we like to do as a basis for smart specialisation therefore you need to combine these data sources and that's part of the work we already did at BAK Basel resulting in the RED, the Regional economic database which offers an efficient and effective starting point for such an analysis.
Thank you for today, looking forward to see you again soon.
