Welcome everybody. 
In the last module, we had a detailed look at the so called Base of Evidence, the first pillar of the information foundation for a smart specialization strategy.
But there is a second pillar and that
are entrepreneurial resources available in the region. 
The idea of smart specialization is not that entrepreneurial activities or innovation has to be generated from scratch started from a new, from nothing but to build on what if already existing. 
It is a smart strategy. 
It builds on what we have. 
But to do that, we of course need to know what kind of entrepreneurial resources are available and to gather this information, is everything else, than straight forward. 
Nearly by definition the information
on entrepreneurial resources is scattered and only unstructured. 
So, that makes it so difficult to gather it. 
But let's have a look how we can proceed. 
The process will be interactive and exploratory. 
It is an unstructured set of information and therefore we need to adopt our process to the kind of information which we find. 
Also it will be usually qualitative information, not quantitative ones, which we need in that part of the process. 
Therefore, it will be also region specific. 
But it's also because regions differ a lot between each other. 
There might be different institution settings and different institutions involved in entrepreneurial activities in the region.
There might be also cultural differences in how the attitudes towards entrepreneurship and who is behaving entrepreneurial.
So, we need to adopt to be regional conditions, that part of the analysis.  
But in any case, it will involve many different kind of people.
There will be entrepreneurs themselves there can be innovative firms, there are researchers at universities and other institutions or other inventors or innovators. 
To name just a few, there might be more, there might be government agencies, there might be investors involved in that process, or as a people.
So if need to gather as much qualitative information as possible, all these stakeholders should be involved in the process and the task of the, of you, in designing a smart specific and strategy, is more that of coordination and gathering the information, than of really doing the analysis yourself. 
Most of the information will be of that more qualitative nature and come from people, but of coarse, data analysis can support you in that process, particularly to identify the institutions, the areas to look at, the people to talk to, the statistical analyzers might be the helpful part of that process. 
Let's have a bit a look what kind of data might be available to give us such hints. 
During our analyze of the base of evidence, we already touched some of this data and here is one example which you already know here from our discussion of the Base of Evidence, the patent network a region has.
Of course any connection we see here in the patent network of the region might also be a hint
to resources available to the region and we can follow up that in more detail. 
And of course, resources available to the region are primarily within the region but such a network connection to other regions, to other institutions, can also be a resource available to the regions in a smart specialization process
So, while doing the base of evidence analysis, you already gather a lot of information which you then can use also for the entrepreneurial resources. 
But we can go into more detail. 
One example or one good source for information are publication statistics of course. 
Particular in the research field, not the applied innovations but more of the research part, publications are an important output of activities and therefore, they reflect the activities available in the region. 
What we see here in this example, is the fields where publications are done, and we see for in this case, it's Ticino again, that nearly a quarter of all publi... no, actually more than a quarter of all publications is in Medicine, and the second quarter is in two more fields, 
Computer Science and Biochemistry. 
So these are fields where there are a lot of publications available in the region, and probably a lot of access points for innovation and entrepreneurial activities.
Of course, the culture of publication in different fields might be different, the high number of medicine publications might be, over estimate the importance of the field because in medicine you usually publish a lot, but still, it is a resource available and by comparison this general publications numbers, you can even filter for such things.
But it gives a hint, for Ticino, where to look at for specialization possibilities. 
Of course you can also look at publications in another dimension. 
You can look at the institutions the publications come from, which university, which research institutions, or maybe other bodies do publish a lot and are therefore worth to do have a closer look at the entrepreneurial resources which they might provide to the region and to the smart specialization strategy. 
Here we have another example of possible information to be used.
It fits and entails a actually 
Federal Program supporting the cooperation between universities and other research institutions, and small and medium sized enterprises called CTI funds.
These projects nearly by definition are entrepreneurial in their spirit and therefore might be good starting point to be included in a smart specialization strategy. 
And we see from the statistics in here that there are 8 to 12 projects in every year in that program within the Canton of Ticino and this is 8 to 12 chances to start smart specialization and to have entrepreneurial resource for a smart specialization strategy.
So it might be worth following that up in more detail and look and deliver the projects and insist unions involved in these projects. 
Coming back to the patents again because this is a very rich data source for our innovation and entrepreneurial activities, we want to have a look, a bit more detailed what could be done here. 
Of course, instead of just looking at the number of patents, we can also look at who is involved in patent activities within the regions, and again we have here an example for Ticino and see that there are a number of companies very active in patenting their innovations and all these might be possible starting points
 for smart specialization again. 
But we can have a more detailed look at patents actually.
Patent databases provide a lot of information on the contents of the patents and which fields the patent belong to, and this information can be used.
In an exercise we have done, we defined 40 future technologies or cutting edge technologies which will shape the future world from what we can from our today's perspective.
Of course, there might be different developments in the future but, these are technologies with the potential to shape the future. 
It is like internet of things, drones, biomedical research, and similar technologies.
We now can draw pattern profiles relating to these forty future cutting edge technologies, and in this example we see it, for one region, what is their technological profile for number of selected of these new cutting edge technologies. 
And we see that the region is particularly well positioned in the area of medical technology and pharmaceuticals. 
This has the highest number of patents. 
Of course, this is also on areas which are already for quite some time active though it's not surprising that the number of patents is higher here, patent which is very well positioned in them. 
Apart from looking at the technologies so that patent fields are in, we can also look at the quality of the patents, there are... there is a high tendency to a lot of patents in the world right now to secure the elected property, but there are possibilities to assess the values of a certain patent, and it is done in the right part of this graphic.
It shows the share of patterns in the technological field which is among top 10 % of worldwide patents. 
The top 10% quality. 
And we see that for the medical technology, it is 36 % or 37 % nearly in the top quality of the patent.
So that's quite a good number if you recall that only 10 % and of all patents in that field in the world are defined as top quality.
But the regions even doing better in pharmaceuticals, it's nearly half of their patents which is of this kind of a top quality. 
And we can also see if we look at another thing, the Internet of Things, here, shortcut-ed we see IoT 
The Internet of Things is a very new development so it's not surprising that the number of patents is not so high, but regions again, nearly 50 % of all patents are in the top area of the top 10 % patents in the world. 
The region has a very high quality of their research in that field and though, therefore again probably that's a good starting point for any smart specialization strategy.
We can even go a step further after identifying the technologies and where regions are strong in, we can look at the institution and companies behind that, patents, and analyze them in more detail. 
That can be done in a regional perspective but in the next example, that will be done in a company perspective
The example is for the company of Siemens, huge, world wide player and we analyze their technological portfolio here.
The size of the bubble in the graphic shows the number of patents in a certain areas.
So it's not surprising if you know Siemens a little bit, that energy generation is the most important patent field they're active in. 
But again, they're also in a number of other of these cutting edge technologies, very active, particularly then there's digital processes and internet of things are quite important.
So, if a new region Siemens is and company of a certain importance, you might have access to all these technologies for your smart specializations strategies via this company.
We can also again have a more detailed look how important these patents are and that is actually what is provided by the two axis in that graph.
Under horizontal axis we see, how often is this field used again in other companies activities in activities of Siemens and we see a huge difference for example, the internet of things is not that much used in other parts of the company while robotics for example, or material designs is used a lot in other fields as well. 
But internet of things is one of the more important areas
Siemens is active in, where other companies, 
Siemens might cooperate this or licensing out it's patents them here these use these kinds of technologies a lot.
So we see that there's already kind of a network for the internet of things activities of Siemens there when other companies used it heavily. 
That is what's given under vertical axis and might be a useful information to define your smart specialization strategy if internet of things might be part of it. 
All these are of course only examples.
As I said before, there must be a region specific analysis and there might be quite different depending on your demands, but this kind of statistics can help you to get into the right directions. 
Now, summing up briefly what we have seen. 
We know entrepreneurial resources as in, essential informational input into the smart specialization strategy.
We don't want to generate all entrepreneurial activities from the scratch or... get new innovation projects from the scratch but we rely on what is already there. 
But it is very difficult to analyze it.
There is no clear statistics we can look at.
We have to do it contextual, we have rely on qualitative information.  
Therefore, of course we have to use various sources, access various sources of entrepreneurial resources where data and statistics analyzers might be one, part of, but certainly not the most important one.
The most one is people active in your region in both in entrepreneurial activities, in both in innovation and get them into the process, gather the information found and at the same time probably involve them into this strategy building.
Last not least, there might be one way to gather this information which we haven't mentioned yet.
But if you recall our discussion of a top-down or bottom-up approach, you find priority area first, and then ask in a call for proposals for entrepreneurial activities in that field or to do it bottom-up, we find the information of entrepreneurial activities and possible priorities and then combine them.
The first one might actually be the one
how to gather the information, or call for the proposals is also a tool for information gathering.
Though, it is a difficult task but there are many opportunities to get to it, and it is essential that we are smart and build our smart specialization strategy on existing resources and not starting everything from scratch. 
Thank you very much. 
