I will, very brief and quick of course go through these studies and take up all the time we have but I think you have, I hope you had the chance to look in and if you need any detail information during the discussion of course come back to the date at any point.
For the background of this study also says smart specialization in the title, it's not about the complete smart specialization strategy, it provided a lot of information, which is necessary to form such a strategy, but it was not really going all the way really to formulate such a strategy.
And explicitly, there are two sectors the finance sector, the tourism sector which are not a part of the study, because teaching had detail analysed of that before.
So, it is not that we don't consider that important that they are not in the study, but they were already covered before that.
The study has a part with international benchmarking so comparing the relative position of the region which is, we think, rather important for smart specialization to know where you are relative to the rest of the world to your competitors, and there it's particularity important to look at things like productivity the importance of a sector in a region, how much is it driving growth and economic wealth.
And on the other hand it has a more detailed part on the Ticino, economy itself, which is not an international comparison there, where we look more at the detail where in Ticino, for example, are the individual industries located or are they more of a clusters in one region, is it a different activity, or activities like trading and pharmaceuticals and research and production pharmaceuticals, are they in the same spot, or in different spots more of this kind of analysis.
Given that, what are the most important findings?
You know? All of you know that Ticino is doing quite well as a Swiss region in international comparison. or within the Swiss framework it is not really in the top position but still doing quite well, which is interesting from our perspective is that we have these three pillars of our analysis.
We first looking at economic performance what has been achieved already, the second looking at the current attractiveness of a region, location factors like taxation, accessibility innovation activities and things like that.
And the third pillar, trying to analyze structure of the region with the potential for future growth, it's not a forecast of future growth, but what structures are available there to generate growth, their productivity again and the productivity and the measure of competitiveness plays an important role, but also in which sectors to reach this kind of part active.
And in these three pillars we observed that Ticino is doing quite well in all three of that.
There's not an outline, one of them's neither to the positive nor to the negative side, all three areas, what has been achieved, how is the current condition in the region and what is the potential that is attractive, for the future are looking better than the European average and to better actuate in some other Swiss regions become very differently positioned in these three indexes.
From the sectors which we identify as interesting apart local finance and tourism, there are four areas which we thing it might be worth to look at it more detail, it might be a starting point for our discussion, but it doesn't need to, it can also be something different, but it's only only hit the pharma industry the pharmaceuticals, or life science industry a bit broader, it is one of the industries which shows very strong growth in Ticino in the last three years, actually increasing the share in the economy subsequently more than in other regions, so there was an above average growth, it's supposed to be growing everywhere but in Ticino it was above average and we see that dynamic is a potential starting point for further growth or at least worth to look at the possibilities.
Then, the textile and the clothing industry, the fashion industry rather sad, it's an old strength of Ticino, it has had some difficult times, but actually less than in other regions there's more substance still here available in TIcino.
And we thing that might be an industry which has potential for a kinds of change if we find good points for smart specialization there, probably with new technologies, like maybe nano-technology or,
I don't know yet what.
It could be the reason we chose, is that it's, first still rather important compared to other regions, and second that it's quite productive in Ticino compared internationally, it's the competitiveness of that industry, it's still rather high.
Then we look at the manufacturing or the engineering industry machinery, and electronics, that's one part particularly if you observe that the patents and innovation activities are quite high and also the sector is competitive internationally, so that might be a starting point, and then finally
ICT is also in effect, which
Ticino growth has gone quite well in the recent, or the last ten years which we particularly focus on, and of course that is growing any way the economy, so that might be a potential as an industry.
I think that are been most important findings and if you don't have any questions at the moment, we might come back to one as a detail in a life period discussion.
