Dialogue and interaction.
Is it really needed as an individual element in the strategy definition?
We think so, through the base of evidence and the entrepreneurship resources, analysis, we gather tons of information and we involve a lot of different stakeholders into the process.
And this vast and complex mattress has to be has to lead to clear decisions.
To clear choices about priority areas.
To take care of this it is not only appropriate to define dialogue into action as an individual step, but it's actually essential to do that.
To demonstrate this necessity but also to show how this very contextual step of the analysis might look like we conducted a kind of a live experiment in the canton of Ticino.
We brought together a group of people from Ticino, all of them experts on the Ticino economy and the Ticino innovation system for a workshop which could be part of a dialogue in an ideal concession, it is a typical setting to be discussed there.
The participants will introduce themselves in a minute in the video.
But it is important to note that they come from different parts of the stakeholders in Ticino.
The group has been given the task to identify possible priority areas
To use the information available to define or to prepare for the choices which need to be made.
It has to be noted that this was not a part of the real world designing of the smart specialization strategy, we just conducted this one workshop as a kind of experiment of example.
Also, there's not a strategy defined now based on this workshop so you can't feed the results in the real world strategy yet it is an experiment which should help us to understand how such a process might work, and also show a couple of the pitfalls and the difficulties you will encounter particularity in these dialogue and interaction fraction of the process.
The geography we discuss in the workshop is the canton
Ticino, an Italian speaking southern most canton of Switzerland.
It's in the Alps, so tourism is one of the important and well known industries there, but there's also a strong industrial base.
This includes textiles, includes life science and pharmaceutical industry, as well as a number of other activities. we already saw quite some examples throughout the course and of course in the reading material to learn more, about the canton.
But now, let's have a huge thanks to the participants in the workshop and to their willingness to devote the time and their vast expert knowledge toward our course, providing us with the second case study of the course.
Hi, I'm Stefano Delissandri form Marconi Technology.
It's a startup company doing manufacturing and technology with personalities.
We have established two years ago in Ticino and we also a company shared by ATI venture.
Okay, my name is Rico Maggi
I'm a director of the institute for economic research of the Universita della
Svizzera Italiana mandate from the canton to observe the Ticino economy so we do yearly reports on the competitiveness of the canton.
We did recently a study on the future of the Ticino economy.
Siegfried Alberton, I'm a professor of economics and management of innovation in the University for applied sciences, I'm also responsible of competence center, which deal with innovation and the partnership issues,
I'm a member of the Swiss team
The GEM, global entrepreneurship monitor
I'm a member also of the CTI and the leadership training courses and recently I've participated in reviewing of the law of economics in Ticino.
My name is Alcide Barberis, since September I am the director of the IGD foundation, which has been created by the canton of Ticino to coordinate the innovation system and Ticino is setting up at the same time also coordinators since May.
Of the promotion center startup of the University, in SUPSI here in Lugano, which as the name suggests is promoting the creation of the startup company and the launching of those startups.
As a background, I myself am a startup founder in the bio-technology sector, in Zürich and as an education
I have a molecular biology degree from the University of Zürich.
I'm Benedetto Lepori,
I'm a professor at the Universita della
Svizzera Italiana
I'm a specialist of research and science innovation policies.
And I'm also a head of UZI and SUPSI research service so I'm supposed to know talking about the development of research in the region.
My name is Pietro Casati, founder and CEO of Dacsystems a startup company active in the innovation systems for monitoring the Antena quality and radio we are inside of the Technoporum and Dacsystem is one company that had the CTI enabled.
I will launch the questions, and what you see are the main challenges for Ticino, and then how we can meet the challenge.
I think it's very important to us from general orientation oh what to do, certainly agree on, let's say, there is pharma pharma-medic, there is a fashion and more than textile and clothing and there's certain machinery, electronic.
The interesting thing is that if we talk now about the industry the fact is that we have a very heterogeneous reality in Ticino.
So we have no big reality of one or the other subjects about we have a huge heterogeneity, and they, often very competitive firms are doing business to business, or they are, let's say delivering elements into other industries being the pharmaceuticals have to be in the hospitals, and the health sector, albeit elsewhere. and so overall yes, I do agree that the performance is high in the Ticino economy according to our analysis, the picture of the competitiveness is a bit less bright, especially concerning productivity, innovation, and investment and one of the key elements of the competitiveness of the canton is the relatively low nominal salaries in Ticino, which gives a relatively high labor intensity as compared to other sectors.
And if you want challenges from me
I can clearly write, it's a small canton and the one big challenge is everything that is linked to human resources and human resource development and that is certainly something that where Ticino, with all the political development will encounter some challenge for any kind of strategy that we will want to invent, because just with Ticinese we will not go that far, we won't even degrade that idea to put into the innovation or eliminate a lower limit of the number of Ticinese or however this is defined and have to be active in a company, to qualify for the subsides.
So overall Ticino is a good location but we need some priorities, as you said and from the sheer size also from the human resources it's to obvious for me and also also fro the altitude towards innovation overall, it's clear for me exactly how we should go there, but I do not ignore that we have enough all sectors, a lot of small very innovative companies who go well anyway.
A little bit further, I think this is the problem here in Ticino, we have problems on the productivity side and innovation side of the companies, so we work a lot identifying sectors , clusters, districts, and everything, but I think the problem is not there, the problem is what is behind there which are the, so called today, key-enabled technologies we need to develop further those kind of sectors.
So, biotech, new materials, micro electronics, new manufacturing systems, all is around the so called
"Industry 4.0", so Internet of things, additive technologies, big data cloud computing and whatever, you know.
This is, I think the main focus for our future developments also in the policy side.
When I started my job in the late 90's
I will say, Ticino research was on the edge of disappearing.
There were some more things sitting around after twenty years we have two higher education institutions, we have some very strong areas, and some of them are potential or already well connected with the private economy, with entrepreneurial activities so we have ICT, we have a lot of mechanics, and material science for example, we now have a lot of bio immunology clinical research etc. so the development on this side is impressive, and I feel without being a specialist of the entrepreneurial side is that a lot of change in Ticino economy, and that there is a lot of dynamic, new companies coming in to add more interaction, etc.
And I have the same feeling around Ticino, it's an attractive place for many reasons.
You say, okay, the universities are there.
We are supported by the SUPSI university, to make a project that we have done in the past, in in the future but from our point of view, to invest more in data center like Siegfried told, or the nano-technology on the new very futuristic technology, like nano-cell it could also be interesting for us to propose to the market the newest technology, because teal speed of the market, it's very fast now.
You cannot think to study a new technology one year and then present, you need to be faster for this reason we need to find smarter people in this region.
This is a good thing. I would like to come back to the "Hard" stuff.
You know?
Because, since we discussed about soft things such as social consensus and everything, I think we are just trying to stop those processes. 
We are looking for the next reason to avoid change, so let's turn sometimes also in the "Hard" infrastructure, and try to develop more of those kinds of discussions about technology, which kind of technology, industrial structure, what kind of knowledge we have to develop more, so called,
"Mint"knowledge and capabilities we have a lot there.
So, let's try to discuss much more on "Hard" stuff.
Yeah, I agree very much with that, because I had a question in my proposal which goes in the same direction
I think we more or less agree that there is a lot of innovative resources and entrepreneur resources available but there seems to be a missing link on the one hand to the society maybe on the other hand we have this cause more to the traditional industries in the region, and probably you can put some focus on the question, like how can we link the available entrepreneurial spirits to the old industries and to the society to recreate the structural change, which is the ultimate goal of smart specialization.
Of course, every entrepreneur company is different.
We establish in canton Ticino, and we find a lot of knowledge very tight cooperation with Universities that is really good, and a very good support from the whole environment.
The things that we are missing, we need is the access to some district to some specialized area, because we are also manufacturing ad we are creating some special product that hey are not high technology even if we have several international patents and some innovational work, but it's a combination of different skills, and Swiss accuracy, and the Swiss skills are combined with the knot of Italy districts and capacity to find particular materials, so particular design or a their product, that would be matched in Switzerland.
That is the mixing of the technology of design of a way to produce, and a way to assembly and test.
Specially, the test assemble would be done, and has been done in Switzerland.
The district, if we do not have any district in this area we'll find the mechanic, the fashion, the materials district, and also the craftsmanship in another place.
Now I think, we are back, now what?
The size of the region, it's clear you need a very rich and thick industrial reality, in which you can then be anchored and you just go, and say okay.
I have heard "a here and there".
And this is the problem really with the border, and being relatively far from the rest of Switzerland.
And the other is of course, it's nice to hear all the praise of the two Universities institutions but again it's also an issue of science, what do you think that it has two things, one in St. Gallen and one in Thun, apart from the main transit, and both of these are about reconversions so St. Gallen is close to textile, in Thun it's nano technology, so you have these much bigger realities and you have a thicker industrial eco-system, and that's certainly a challenge.
I think the discussion is interesting, questioning also a bit the smart specialization concept, see this because of course when you take a region like
Ticino, say, a regional specialization strategy in a way, makes limited sense exactly because you ware too small, on the other hand
I think we all agree that there are some ideas in this regional concept that proximity , some regional belonging etc. evaluate the economies demonstrated.
The important question is, how you put together this openness that we all agree, such a small region must be open.
With the fact that the region keeps some consistency, and of course my answer would be that a regional specialization strategy should look for strategic alliances, outside of the region.
Because if you just say we are swimming in a very big sea of networks, you get simply lost because you are small.
As we are throwing now towards the new things on the table, I think one thing we have at the moment totally left out is service.
So we are here, fascinated by the industrial reality rightly so, because
Chino is underestimated nevertheless Ticino has always been for the last twenty, thirty years, service oriented economy.
And it could be the smart bit of the smart specialization strategies, which is a concept that I've learned now, and
I'm very proud of it.
I think it could be the smart, but we in our report talked about meta sectors, quite simply with the idea that every industrial activity should be tightly linked to specialized services in witch
Ticino is strong.
We had the financial sector orientated in one way it could be a part of a smart strategy to re-orientate it towards the integration, with specific sectors specific realities, the same region reach, to put it this way of lawyers right, some of them might become useful, highly unlikely but-
He's an economist.
But you never know, then the whole consulting and the ICT departed the, let's say, the service parts,
I think it could be a smart thing to say:"Okay, we take this sectors" identified but thinking more in a transversal way and say:
"It is linked to the quality of life, to the sun-bell concept."
"To Switzerland. etc." and say:"Okay it could be the place where we think more about where are the services that we would need to promote the industrial activities in a way it should develop."
So, I think the two issues, the smart specialization strategies to creating competences and critical mass, and so on. locally, and the new technologies, the new way of communications opening up to the rest of the  world.
They go hand in hand.
It's like you know, a machine because you cannot have in Ticino a growing, you cannot create smart specialization strategies without opening.
I think that Chino has did a lot in the last fifteen, twenty years in building up the so called regional system of innovation so we have a lot of activities in the private sector in the public sector, in these
"Triple helix" approach did really a lot, so we have some seeds of these strategies if you want, but we lack something.
Which is important and we even talked too much about this.
That is the entrepreneurial culture you know, transforming these seeds in new companies, in new startups or other entrepreneurial activities. 
This is the issue.
Now, and the next years, because we built it up out of many ingredients.
You know?
But now we have to transform this in some entrepreneurial activities, and then we'll have some problems.
I don't think we have to mix up things.
I'm not saying that the technology sectors are much more important than the traditional.
When I said, enable technologies, enable knowledge and everything they are crossing.
We need new business models, in tourism, in electronics, in manufacturing.
Everywhere, you know?
This kind of innovation, this is not products and not only products or processes, or pieces of, we need those kind of things crossing the sectors.
I think one other critical point, not to repeat all the same
I think it's like a concept of project.
So, I observe for a while that you haven't nursed, you have public ideas of how to promote things, but it's very difficult in this canton reality to talk about projects so common efforts with clear goals, and different stakeholders with a good management of project it's not the way of thinking here, this I think he knows the challenge better than anyone else nowadays.
"Okay, but let's define that within three years, we want know whether we do it or not" and if it's working in this direction.
This idea of project, and the management of projects that we had, too much in the world where everyone has his or her own responsibilities, the task, and it's very difficult to it's rather based on entrepreneurship, in the sense of not having enough people who feel like doing business that I feel is a bit critical.
I got a lot out of the discussion in two kinds of directions.
One is where, excuse me, as a system approach how is the innovative and entrepreneurs system working in Ticino, and I think we saw a lot there that there are many good approaches and a lot of development in the last fifteen or twenty years, and there's a lot of potential there, but it seems that, you put it as seeds that they are not ready to grow up yet.
And we probably need to grow it up.
I think that's one thing
I take out of the discussion which is foremost smart specialization, serves to put it in the order, somewhere on the bottom line, it's still not a smart specialization strategy, but they are areas which we could look into more detail.
And the second thing I got out of the discussion is more on the, let's say, project or activities side, if you know the smart specialization project it's not that the focus areas but it's more projects in individual activities supporting these focus areas.
So, like doing more for the human capital attracting people back to the region, linkage between the universities and the firms more, maybe it's only an informational issue.
Be open to the outside world as well form strategic partnerships.
All these are individual measures to improve the areas.
And as I put that we already see that there's something missing in between, where should we focus it?
And I thing it was very clear,
Ticino's a small region and it can't be completely self-sufficient, by itself we need outside linkages, still there is a local or regional component to the development.
And what I haven't really got out of the discussion is which are the areas it is worth focusing in?
Which are the entrepreneurial approaches available with the potential to create a structure change which areas? Not sectors, we discussed, mentioned a few sectors but in more detail, where are, where should we focus our activities on human capital building, attracting people back, grow the seeds and so on, and so forth.
And also, I don't want to hear you say that you don't want to get this far, I would like to post the end question to everybody.
Tell me that, two areas that you think, Ticino and Ticino policy and Ticino environment should put a focus on in the future to develop? 
Not on the sector level, but a bit deeper than the sector level like in tourism you, booking systems in pharmaceuticals, new bio technology in fashion new materials.
What areas do you think, just tell me two of them you think it might be worth to put the focus in.
That would have been:"Here's what we have, please work."
That is what consultants always do, don't they?
Just go back to the beginning, no?
My two areas are the key-enabled technologies and as far as knowledge competencies and everything is concerned, the meat.
We need this, and this is the crossing sector.
Never mind which kind of sector, technological, traditional or everything, we need those kind of things.
I would go back to services.
If you look, we are living in a canton where young people have parents who are either lawyers if they want to go on, or either lawyers or they are "fiduciaire" or they are very much in the service sector aimed at the tourists.
And I think, to look for a very similar way, to look for specific services that support activities.
So we have an University with tourism, we have a lot of things going on now around our master program
I think the idea of having, also, new legal services probably that can help for the new, let's say, letting a company grow services and so, traditional stuff, but more tuned into the industrial reality that we have.
And, probably also networking and communications specialists.
Of course that's perfectly fair, in the region like Ticino must be opened and see what happens, in a way offering general services, but if you think especially of fabric investment, and fabric investment in RND decides constraints on choices, and these choices need to be more or less aligned with what they all set in the private economy of the, why is here, what the economies know that you have miss-alignments in sectoral terms.
And if I see from the competences, which are developing in the public
RND, of course you can always buy competences outside, but there are at least two very big clusters, one is around everything which is around ICT and data, and computation in this area where of course we have a big asset having conventional super computer center and we have all kinds of competencies around that area and probably the other one is around, you could call
"Pharma" but more, say,
Bio, we have a bio-medical institute which is one of the top, which is why, we now have the Faculty of Bio-Medical science, and we have some competencies with bio-materials so there must be a reflection also at the terms of sectors from the public policies, without the clue you have an office sector which is not foreseen we should have lots because of the multinational competency if the company comes in Ticino is so big that it changes completely the size.
That's at least what I think.
Okay!
Not to be fair,  i will give my tow ideas as well.
I think.
They go in the same direction, probably as what you said because pharma and bio technology would be one of my focus areas as well, because there's a lot of potential here, and there's a lot of potential in Switzerland to cooperate in that area and it is an industry of the future, so that's pretty straight forward.
And the other area I would look in this combination fashion competences and ICT competence because I think that's an industry, the fashion and all the background there of production. and also of the selling, and stuff would be very very much changed by the ICT in the near future, and that's a big chance for Ticino to grab a big piece of that cake because they have two competencies in that direction, and I would have that as one of the focus areas.
-Thanks.
-Thank you.
