The Internet’s strengths and weaknesses lay precisely in in its ability to transmit information with unparalleled efficiency.
As matter is energy in mass form, it resists movement.
The larger the mass, the greater the energy requires to move it.
The light or electricity we use to communicate information via the Internet, however, are forms of electromagnetic energy, i.e. waves whose speed is ideally close to nearly a billion kilometers an hour.
It is by channeling this energy in the form of continuums that we are able to reach transmission of this rapidity at a global scale.
Thus are we witnessing the emergence of new spaces that reorganize the relative arrangement of things.
These spaces are not mere transpositions of existing spaces: libraries, shops, newsstands, schools, bars, public place, etc.
They are original spaces with specific qualities that use immateriality in an exceptional way, which is why they have such impressive transmission speeds and cover unprecedented expanses.
The Internet’s limitations are nonetheless numerous.
For instance, it is powerless in meeting the many material needs
 of our existence.
Our bodies have a complex spatiality requiring matter.
Digital technology can undoubtedly help us better understand our practices and how they evolve, as feedback to help us make decisions and change our behavior.
But digital technology is limited to organizing information, which is not the extent of our bodies’ demands.
Our bodies need protection from the elements, to be fed with food and to be healed with compounds.
Multisensory interaction is also widely sought after, whereas the Internet is limited to two immaterial senses and cannot truly convey textures, flavors and smells.
Our bodies themselves are made of matter and have mass, thus limiting their mobility.
Therefore, far from abolishing space, the Internet reorganizes it, increasing its potential and differentiating it even more, constantly activating the value of situated resources whose materiality is a constraint or a gift.
The Internet thus reminds us of the plural nature of the territories that are home to our bodies and the places that are home to our lives.
Thus, in just a few decades,
 space has radically changed,
 offering new interpersonal opportunities.
In a hyperconnected environment,
 even disconnection is a change, at least relatively speaking.
The World is more cohesive but is also more diverse.
It is not so much the homogenization of the world we are witnessing as that of these processes of differentiation.
The latter are based on generic systems and norms: airports, hotels, restaurants, cell phones and the Internet, whose similarities mask their spatial potency and the diversity of their uses, like so many points of reference from which to take action.
Currently, the gap between our understanding of this dynamic and its effectiveness is particularly important, as the Internet has created a space whose potential and practices stem from logics that fit poorly into the frames of reference we have developed thus far.
In particular, it gives rise to unprecedented interactions,
from the local to the global scale, like so much potential contact between individuals regardless of the distance that separates them.
This dynamic - which began with the first roads and cities,
with shipping lanes, railroads, writing, printing, the radio,
telephone and television - is experiencing an important revival.
By changing space, we affect one of society’s fundamental dimensions, one of its most powerful driving forces.
How can we imagine that by simplifying the exchange of goods between China and Europe that we are only affecting the distribution of material goods?
How can we believe that in inventing the car we are only affecting mobility?
How can we assume that in creating the Internet, we are only affecting the circulation of information?
Perhaps the Internet was an Eldorado inhabited by pioneers who sought the coming of a better world.
But the Internet is above all a space whose every basic component we build.
It is not so much an existing space to be discovered but a space to be invented, again and again.
Understanding the tensions that affect contemporary societies implies taking space seriously, not as a mere projection of the social realm that situates what occurs but as one of its conditions.
Without space there is no society.
Without contact the social realm disappears without enchantment.
Without communication life is reduced to nothing, emptied from the outside, without otherness..
Society is therefore not given.
It is born of distance, of the space between people, for which it is both a solution and a problem.
Because it is fragile, it is constantly recomposed based on the many acts and individual expressions that together provide the delicate balance between today’s society and the one to come.
Society is a solution when it liaises between individuals with multiple and/or conflicting intentions.
Society is a problem when it no longer is part of the space that gives it life, and when it falls short of or goes beyond the actual relationships between individuals.
Yet, the Internet does not abolish space.
On the contrary, it creates space between people, a space of considerable power that reorganizes our environment in specific ways.
Because the Internet offers a unique space, it is imperative to think about its architecture, design, organization and players, and to identify the practices that develop therein, their logics and the favorite haunts emerging from this renewal.
This space – both an economic and a political issue - has become subject to intense conflicts in which companies, that have become multinational
in less than two decades, are pitted against States whose sovereignty is impacted by a network that is too big for them, and individuals whose interests and privacy are challenged by this space of often opaque intricacy.
