After the introduction to the general concepts of lithography, and details on mask writing and UV Lithography technics,
I'll now focus this lesson on Electron Beem Lithography
EB Litho or short EBL.
It allows for better resolution down to 5  nanometer level.
This is important for many devices in nano-science and nano-technology.
In his lecture we first describe the equipment and then detailed EB Litho specific process steps.
This chapter shows details on the EB Litho tool, like the one you saw on the cover slide of this lesson.
I will first introduce the main components that I require for an EBL system, starting from the different vacuum levels show how electrons are emitted by the electron gun, how then the electron are then focused into the probe, by lenses and to mention the imperfections called aberration.
Then I will describe how the electrons are deflected and controlled over the sample to write into the resist, and I will wrap this lesson up with some example tools.
EB Lithography is motivated by the possibility to overcome the optical diffraction limit.
As we have seen, resolution in optical projections systems it's limited to about lambda over 2.
Of course industrial DUV Lithography has developed many process tricks to push the resolution of optical lithography down to deep sub hundred nano-meter scale.
But these methods can be extremely costly and complex while they still require an original high resolution mask.
Instead of photons, we are now considering electrons which are charged elementary particles.
Electrons can also be described as a wave with a corresponding wavelength, even by the De Broglie equation that depends on their velocity.
We'll do an equivalent wavelength of an electron, is given by the blanks constant over the momentum of the electron.
We'll have a look at some numbers.
At 1 KV, acceleration voltage, the wavelength of the electron is in the order of 0.038 nano-meter.
Much smaller than an angstrom.
At 10 KV, it gets even smaller below point 1 angstrom, and for 1 KV we have already 0.0038 nano-meter wavelengths.
Typical EB is performed between 30 and 100 KV
The effective wavelength of the electron is accelerated and a EB Lithography tool is in the order of a few picometers.
But unfortunately, the resolution limit using electrons in an EBL Lithography tool is not given by it's waves properties, but rather by other effects such as beam focusing, electron scattering, and charging.
It can reach down to sub 10 nanometer scale in good cases.
The main disadvantage of
EBL Lithography are the low throughput because it is using a single electron beam to write, and therefore high fabrication costs.
Here on the right side you see
2 nice examples images.
Here's an SEM image of 2 layers of HSQ, which is a negative resist.
The scale bar here is 1 micro meter, and these lines in the order of a couple of hundred nanometer wide, with the very in pitch to check their resolution and alignment capability.
This SEM image shows a high resolution and high aspect ratio.
HSQ resist pillars, which is 15nm in diameter, and 150nm in height
These white spots here are the pillars seen from the top.
Whereas these are pillars that have collapsed during the last process.
It shows their width, a high aspect ratio of the pillar.
The key ability of an
EB Lithography system is to focus a beam of electron into a few nanometer range, and then to directly write with the electrons in the resist of a relative placement of beam and substrate.
EBL is therefore a direct write serial technic similar to laser writing that we discussed earlier for the mask making a UV Lithography.
The electrons are first extracted from the gun, and the accelerated towards a series of electron lenses that will focus and correct ratios in order to obtain the smallest and brightest possible electron beam.
Additional features include beam blankers, and beam deflectors.
The resist coded wave is placed on a stage, who's position can be controlled by optical interferometers.
The user interacts with a column indirectly via exposure software that controls the hardware so called pedal generator.
Samples are loaded and unloaded unto a system via a vacuum lock not shown on this slide.
EB Lithography requires a high vacuum chamber so that electrons can freely travel from the gun to the wafer.
The EB column is built inside the vacuum system, like shown here.
Different vacuum levels are required for the different parts of the electron column.
High vacuum is required at the electron gun reaching to void source, contamination by residual gas molecules.
Further down in the column, the vacuum requirements becomes less stringent.
Ionic pumps are required for the guns and the optics.
At the sample levels turbo pumps are typically sufficient.
How can we have different vacuum levels in one chamber?
The electro-optic section of the EBL tool is almost entirely separated from the sample stage.
Except for a small aperture called Differential Pumping Aperture.
Which is large enough to let the electrons down the column, but small enough to maintain differential presure.
Note that the high vacuum air does not get sucked through holes like the domestic vacuum cleaner, because the path of air atoms at low pressure can be many meters, so that they never bump into each other.
They just bounce around the chamber and rarely pass through the small aperture.
This way it's possible to have a pool vacuum in the sample stage region, say 5.10-7 mbar but high vacuum 10-8 mbar.
Or better, in the gun electron optics part of the column.
So lets now have a look at the electron source, also called gun.
Different option exist when we meet electron from the metal source into vacuum.
One variation is to use thermionic sources, where the source is heated to overcome the work function to bring electrons into the vacuum.
Another way to use the so called
Field Emitters, where high electric potential is applied to the sharp tip.
In EB Lithography, the electron source must combine the two following properties:
First, ideally it is monochromatic to reduce chromatic aberrations.
Second, it has a high brightness and crown stability.
Field Emitter will fill these requirements much better than thermionic sources.
So, lets see how a field emitter electron gun looks like.
With the cutter, the tip is at the tip of it's potential with respect to the first anode, which is the extractor.
In order to create a high field to extract the electrons from the tip.
Between the extractor and the second anode, the electrons are further accelerated.
The main function of the suppressor up here, is to limit electron emission to the end of the tip.
This helps to reduce the effect in source size and improves resolution. the potential of the suppressor is negative relative to the tip.
Typically Schottky field emitter guns are used which are thermal field emitting sources.
In such CFEG, a single crystal tonsil tip is coated with zirconium oxide which has the unusual property of increasing the electrical connectivity at high temperature.
Zirconium oxide allows lowering the work function compared to tonsil alone. compared to cold field emitting guns, these guns are less bright but deliver stable high currents and a less demanding aberrations.
(INAUDIBLE) field emitter systems is typically a single crystal sharpened tonsil bar.
This allows for (INAUDIBLE) meters of a few tens on nanometer for short (INAUDIBLE) all the way down to 5 nanometer for cold field emitting guns.
Schottky field emitters are ideal for UV Lithography do to the excellent count stability which is below 1% probe noise versus up to 10% for cold field emitting guns.
They have low current drift, below 1% versus over 5% for cold field emitting guns.
Thermionic field emitters are typically not used in UV Lithography do to their large source diameter, and actually spread unlimited lifetime.
The electric field on the tip of a Schottky Field Emitter is applied to decrease the material working function.
For this reason, such field emitters are coated with low working function such as zirconium dioxide.
Even if Schottky Field Emitter is a Thermionic emitter, the brightness and the current density are compared to that of a cold field emitter.
Here we can see 2 images of a Schottky field emitting gun.
On the left, the zirconium oxide reservoir is nicely seen below the tip.
In the central image, one can identify the crystal planes of the tonsil tip on the
Schottky emitter
And for cold field emitting guns, her on the right side, the tip is sharpened to about 100nm.
The high electric fields the electrons are thus extracted directly from the tip.
The electron gun choice has a large impact on the beam diameter. that is also called probe diameter as can be seen on the graphs here on the right, different gun types are compared where the probe current is displayed as a function of the probe diameter for two acceleration voltages,
30Kv here, and 1Kv down here.
In EBL, one typically employs currents from a few 100 picloram range, to several 10's of 100's of nano-amps.
As seen in the graphs, these current values their electron beam diameter undergoes large changes.
From a few nanometer to several 10's of nanometers. you can also see that these current diameter relations are not linear, and they vary largely from one gun type to the other.
Therefore, a good metric to compare gun types, is therefore needed and introducing the concept of brightness or better.
It is defined as how much current is emitted per unit solid angle, per unit area of limiting surface.
Described in this drawing here.
This should be compared at equivalent acceleration voltage and takes into account beam current diameter and incident angle on the sample.
For example, thermionic emitter may have very high beam current, shown here.
But very low brightness do to the large spot size.
It is additionally important to be able to tune the electron beam so that one can write large features with the large beam and then use low currents to write finer features.
So now let's have a look how we can control and focus the electrons.
Typically like in optical systems, it's focused by electric lenses.
Like shown here.
We have here the lens, and if you come with the light... focus on the focus point here, further down.
Electron trajectory, on the other hand is controlled by electrostatic or electromagnetic lenses according to the force.
Shown here.
You can see that we can exert force on a charge particle either by an electric field or by a magnetic field and velocity of the particle.
Electrostatic lenses are typically used for beam blanker or the gun region.
They have high operation speed, but they have other large operations.
Therefore, electromagnetic lenses are used for beam shaping.
A magnetic lenses forms from two circle symmetric iron or some other high premier ability material pieces. with a coper winding in between.
A divergence of the magnetic flux along the set access applies a force on the electrons back towards the set access resulting in focusing action.
The magnetic field causes a rotation of the electrons and the image.
About the set access in a crux fashion.
(INAUDIBLE) not affect performance} of the lens, it does impact the design alignment operation of the system.
For instance, the deflection system must be rotated physically with respect to the stage coordinates.
Also when aligning a column, a wide placement in the upper region of the column will not correspond to the same wide displacement at the target.
And finally, changes in focus or changes in the hide of the sample can cause a slight rotation in the deflection coordinates.
This must be properly corrected or stitching and overly errors will result.
Like in optical microscopy, a number of operations limit the ultimate resolution of the electron probe.
There are 4 types of aberrations listed here from A to D.
Spherical Aberrations are the result of a homogeneous focusing property, for electrons travelling on or off the axis.
Chromatic Aberrations is the result of varying  focus for electrons of different energy.
Both of these aberrations can be minimized by reducing the conversions angle of the system so that electrons are confined to the center of the lenses at the cost of greatly reduced beam current.
Astigmatism occurs  when the electrons sense a non consistent magnetic field as they spill around the optical lens which arises from construction errors.
The result is a non symmetrical beam cross-section.
At low energies and with convergence angles altered diffraction may play a significant role.
Shown here. the understanding of aberrations is essential to reach mininal effective beam diameters that enable high patterning resolutions.
You can see here on the graph on the right side, all the aberrations mentioned previously must be taken to account at once,
Also in relation with the beam convergence angle.
In practice, the effective beam diameter is indeed expressed by the square root of each contribution squared and summed.
Whereas the virtual source size limit does not depend on the beam convergence angle, this line right here.
Chromatic and spherical aberrations obviously increase with greater convergence angle.
This relation is inverted for diffraction.
Reaching an optimal work configuration requires the optimization of all contributions rather than seeking the individual minimization.
Notably end in relation to the previous lights each aberration in contribution to the final beam diameter are subject to additional parameters other than the beam convergence angle and maybe optimized in part independently by the instrument design or choice of acceleration voltage.
The electron beam may be deflected over a range of typically from a few
10's of micrometers to millimeter.
Writing in large areas requires that the stage is physically moved to reach a neighboring region and ultimately to write the entire surface.
This writing region is called a field, that is  itself divided into subfields.
The main fields correspond to the maximum beam deflection range.
If you choose a certain beam step size the tool can only handle a finite number of pixels.
If the steps size is too small then the field size is limited to the beam step size times the maximum number of pixels.
Deflecting an electron beam across main fields at a hundred of microns in size is associated with very large electric or magnetic coils in correspondingly with settling times do to the larger fields that need to be applied, which at the end will slow down the writing process.
In order to increase writing speed, an additional subdivision of the patterning (INAUDIBLE) subfields is implemented into the system.
These fields are approximately two orders of magnitude smaller and inside them the electron beam is raster scan at very high speed by another set of coils.
These coils are much smaller do to the small deflection they need to exert and thus, their settling time si much smaller compared to the main field ones.
Beyond fields the sample is mechanically moved so high resolution stage is typically allowed for resolutions below the NM.
However, mechanical stage drifts result in possible mismatch at the field boundaries known as field stitching.
As you will see, different methods exist to manage field stitching and within a single field different writing strategies are possible.
Either raster scanning, like shown here, or vector scanning, like shown here.
The raster scanning, one wants to expose the green parts when raster scans the electron beam and blanks it on and off when it passes over the design area.
The vector scan is that the electron beam is already steered to only expose the area that has to be written.
Here we can see an animation of a field stitching approach, where the stage is mechanically moved between two writing fields and where the alignment is very critical.
Another strategy involves a fixed electron beam and a continues stage movement.
This way, no field stitching involved resulting in continues patterns but this method is much slower.
Electron beam lithography tools for research can be configured in 2 ways:
One is to convert a scanning electron microscope SEM on the left side.
As a scanning electron microscope already includes the main elements required to perform lithography, the only component that needs to be added is the pattern generator.
It consists of a beam blank cut to switch on and off the beam, as it scans the sample, as well as a computer control.
That's low cost EBL systems are typically using acceleration voltages of 30Kv and they do not benefit from the advantages of a dedicated
EBL column in terms of speed and stability.
So, dedicated EBL tools will operate at a higher voltage up to 100Kv and allow for high proof and stability.
They have higher costs of several millions of euros, but they are essential and needed for mask writing in UV masks and nano science research.
