In the previous lessons we have seen how the designs prepared for electron beam lithography. and in particular about the fracturing of the pattern into convenient units to ensure best beam writing quality such as resolution, but also keeping in mind the writing speed.
Here we will now see further details on the e-beam lithography in particular how the electrons interact with the resist-coated sample, and what parameters are to be understood and optimized.
These are the resist contrast, the various types of e-beam resist proximity effects. as well as alignment processes.
The electrons are accelerated to high energy and are focused onto the surface. 
As the electrons penetrate the resist they experience the so called "scattering".
Forward scattering at small angles occurs to the incoming electrons which tend to broaden the initial beam diameter.
When the electrons reach the substrate, they undergo large angle scattering, which also leads to back scattering.
The increase in effective beam diameter in nano meters due to forward scattering, can be given apparently by the following formula.
The forward scattering can be expressed by 0.9 times the resist thickness Rt, over the acceleration voltage the power of 1.5.
Using the thinnest possible resist and the highest available accelerating voltage can minimize forward scattering.
Back scattered electrons may return back to the resist at a significant distance from the incident beam, causing additional resist exposure.
This is called the electron beam proximity effect.
The range of the electrons is defined here as the distance a typical electron travels in the bulk material before loosing all it's energy.
The range depends on both the energy of the primary electrons and the type of substrate.
So here, on the upper right side, you can see two examples of simulated results showing the distribution of the electrons from incoming beam, from the top here that hits the surface, the PMMA photo-resist and then the scattering into the resist and the silicon substrate for voltage of 10 kV and the same is done here for a voltage of 20kV.
We can already see that, for an example the forward scattering which is the widening of the incoming beam during the impact is much more narrow for higher voltages compared to the lower voltages.
So, if one aims for a higher resolution patterning one obviously goes to higher voltages to minimize this scatter effects, forward scatter effect during the impact.
On the other hand, please note also that all these back scattered electrons that come out through the photo-resist at some further distance location also cross-link or alter the photo-resist, which then will also be exposed which is then called the proximity effect.
If we now focus on how the atomic mass Z, of the substrate material influences the electron range, for a given acceleration voltage we obtain the following dependents for gallium arsenide (GaAr) the lower curve, silicone in the middle, and the PMMA on top.
So as expected, high atomic mass materials show reduced electronic range.
And here on the right side, we see a typical radial energy profile away from the beam in pin point.
The forward and back scattering are approximated by two gaussians.
Please, note that this scale is done in logarithmic scale.
Now let's have a more detailed look how the path of the incoming primary electrons and generated secondary electrons influence the resist exposure, shown here.
Photo-resist with the substrate and the primary electrons.
Forward scattering at small angles of the primary electrons is the first source of beam broadening.
As these primary electrons slow down much of the energy is dissipated in the form of secondary electrons, with energies that are per definition between 2meV and 50meV so about three orders of magnitude lower than the primary electrons which are at kilo electron-volts
(kmeV).
The secondary electrons are responsible for the majority of the actual resist exposure process.
The travel range is only a few nanometers, which results in a slight broadening of the exposed area.
These two affect largely account for the minimum practical resolution obtainable in the highest resolution electron beam systems, and contribute to the bias that is seen in positive resist where the exposed features develop larger than the size they were nominally written.
Primary electrons may also back scatter at high angles, so in back scattering an electron collides with a much heavier nucleus which results in an elastic scattering event and the electron thereby retains most of it's energy but changes direction.
These back-scattered primary electrons can travel a long distance away from the beam impact point and thereby create secondary electrons that will expose the resist quite far away from the intended impact location.
This results in the well known white background exposure known as proximity effect.
Due to the scattering effect, the interaction volume or the exposed zone depends on the beam energy.
Indeed, a similar exposure dose which is the total charge per surface delivered at different acceleration voltages results in different lithography results.
For instance, at high acceleration voltage the electrons mostly penetrate through the resist with little interaction and require a higher dose to clear.
As seen in the cross section images, forward scattering is well visible in the tapered resist profiles.
As expected, forward scattering is more pronounced for low acceleration voltages.
On the top-right, we can see that higher acceleration voltages a greater dose is needed to obtain full opening of the PMMA after development.
High energy electrons penetrate through the resist and scatter in a large volume and thus interact less with the resist than for lower acceleration voltages .
At low voltages the interaction volume is limited more within the thin resist layer.
In the two figures here bellow, we can see further illustration of this concept.
Additionally from the schematic on the lower-right you can see the evolution of dose to clear, as well as the resist profile due to forward scattering.
This is shown experimentally from the images on the left.
At 640μC/cm^2 we can see the characteristic tapered angle induced by the forward scattering.
For now, let's have a look at the actual resist exposure details which are contrast and sensitivity.
Sensitivity is the dose needed to fully clear positive or cross-link negative resist.
The higher sensitivity resist allows for fast writing.
On the other hand, most high resolution resists are of moderate sensitivity for following reasons.
When targeting ultimate resolution and electron beam of of a few nanometer width is used to expose the correspondingly small area.
The highly sensitive resist requires only a very limited number of electrons to be exposed.
The process is consequently very sensitive to beam shot noise.
In order not to be affected by shot noise one typically chooses a lower resist sensitivity so that the relatively large number of electrons are needed for the exposure of very fine patterns.
Another important feature of the resist is the contrast which is defined as the slope of the dose to thickness variation.
Which is shown here, so D100 is the dose to clear meaning the lowest dose when the resist is fully opened after development, and D0 is the largest dose where the resist is still not exposed enough to induce a thickness difference after development.
In typical processing conditions, high contrast resists are preferred as it is often correlated with resolution.
Essentially the high resolution resist will result in a binary system.
The lower dose threshold resist is unaffected, above the dose threshold it is fully removed, in case of positive or cross-linked in case of negative.
Although proximity effects may still distort the pattern, higher contrast results allow induce blurring of the written pattern.
Low contrast resist, on the other hand find interesting applications in the gray-scale lithography.
As seen here, the low contrast allows for fine modulation of the final resist thickness in order to create out of plain features.
One important point to consider is the resist contrast characterizes the full processing of the resist, which when developing, playing an equally important role than exposure.
So here in the bottom you see two SEM images that show the result of and exposure and developing of a gray-scare
3d e-beam lithography, and we can see here the entire thickness of the resist, which is roughly 1μm and then goes down step by step 785,
550, 345, and 146nm.
With the low contrast resist one is able to perform such gray-scale lithography which is not possible with the high contrast resist.
Let's now have a look at some typical EBL resists.
We start with PMMA, that is a positive resist widely used in electron beam lithography due to it's high resolution and low cost.
PMMA usually provides a relatively low etch resistance but it is an excellent choice for a lift off process.
When an electron is hitting the molecule of PMMA it breaks the bonds and associates the large molecule into smaller by products and mono mass which are then removed by the developing step.
By tuning the molecular weight of the PMMA, the resist sensitivity can be tuned to a large extent.
Therefore, by coating the two layers of PMMA starting with one of higher and the second one of lower sensitivity, T-shaped undercuts are produced.
Indeed, via single exposure the chain scission reaction PMMA after e-beam exposure will produce a wide opening in the first resist layer.
This bi-layer process is a standard for EBL-based lift off that guarantees limited side, where coverage of the operated material to ensure successful lift off, like shown here in this SEM picture.
In the context of positive resists other alternatives such as
CSAR and ZEP provide higher sensitivity and a better etch resistance but to the expense of a slightly lower resolution and much greater cost.
HSQ is one of the highest resolution EBL negative photo-resist.
It's inorganic, cage-like network resembles that of low-density silicone-dioxide.
Upon exposure HSQ is cross-linked and very resistant to further post-processing making it an ideal candidate as mask for dry etching.
It is interesting to know the unexposed regions are developed by chemical reaction with NaOH, producing H2 and not by simple dissolution.
Ultimate contrast and resolution is reached in, so-called salty developers.
HSQ is efficiently removed or stripped by diluted HF.
We will now have a more detailed look at the proximity effect that are at the hear of the electron beam lithography.
As exposure occurs beyond the beam diameter and beam impact point the dose outside of the intended area may be sufficient to expose the resist.
If the patterns are significantly smaller than the back-scattering range, and uniformed in density.
This will result in a uniformed background dose.
Therefore a simple dose scaling is applied to correct for the unwanted proximity effect.
For large patterns, or complex geometries this is more complicated.
As seen in the image on the right for a large pad in the order of 500μm size and an associated connection wire with 100μm width the dose is locally adjusted by proximity effect corrections.
One can see for example that the dose in the edges must be increased compared to the dose at the center of the square.
Red is more dose, blue is less dose.
The base of these corrections relies on the modeling of the energy distribution away from the beam impact point which is commonly referred to as the point spread function or the PSF.
As seen previously, two main effects are responsible for energy distribution in the substrate.
Forward and backward scattering. 
The simplest, yet efficient model to approximate the point spread function is therefor
Double Gaussian.
One Gaussian accounts for forward scattering and depends on the α (Alpha) parameter mostly affected by acceleration voltage, and resist thickness.
The second Gaussian is defined by β (beta) that accounts for the back-scattering that heavily depends on the atomic mass Z of the substrate and acceleration voltage.
The last parameter ι (Iota) modulates the ratio between forward and backward scattering, if ι=0 means there is back scattering, whereas if ι=1 it allows for equal weight of both Gaussians in the point spread function (PSF).
ι is here, and here.
The 3D graph of a Double Gaussian system shows well, the sharp center peak here and the broad background distribution of the back scattered electron.
If one can determine experimentally the α, β, and ι parameters one can compute the effective dose delivered at the each shot location
taking to account the background exposure from the neighboring pixels.
Once this computation is done, the proximity effect correction consists in scaling the dose per pixel to provide a uniformed effective energy delivered on the substrate regardless of pattern density.
In practice we choose that the 50% density pattern has the nominal base dose and are not scaled, whereas isolated features are corrected to receive the higher dose, while the patterns denser that 50% receive a lower dose.
In order to obtain the proper point spread function for double Gaussian approximation, that will allow for the proximity corrections, nested structures of different density are written to isolate the various parameters.
While α is typically effecting the short range and is difficult to measure, it's in the range of 10nm to 20nm at most
β and ι are more easily determined experimentally.
Using standard substrates such as silicon or silicon-dioxide on silicon, large amounts of experimental values for β are available.
Different methods allow determining β experimentally.
Here we will focus on ι, because it largely depends on the resist type and then therefor vary widely.
The test patterns used checkerboards like show here, the 250nm squares and 50nm squares that provide a good basis for the measurement of the critical dimensions.
They are surrounded by periodic patterns of varying density with an extent greater than the back scattering range in order to reproduce the different background conditions.
So this checkerboard is surrounded by zero patterns around this one is completely filled
100% with writing area and this is a 50% writing area coverage around the checkerboard test pattern.
Knowing α and β from literature, the user will run software proximity effect corrections on these patters for a wide range of ι, and will write the patterns for different doses to perform metrology and identify optical proximity effect correction conditions.
At 50% density, the effective dose in the central pattern region is not affected by the choice of either.
In fact, when performing the proximity effect correction the dose is augmented or reduced for lower or higher densities only.
The 50% pattern shown on the previous slide will therefor be used to determinate our base dose.
Three levels of features allow for the assessment of the base dose.
The dimensions of the loading line, as well as the checkerboards with square edge length of 250nm and 50nm.
Like shown here.
Let's now look at some real examples using HSQ resist.
First looking at the image at the top right here the base dose is determined by measuring the line width of the fifty density, 50% density pattern.
When underexposed, 1000μC/cm^2, the lines are narrow, whereas when overexposed we see use of line broadening is observed.
If looking at the central checkerboard one can see that when underexposed, the small checkerboard is absent and gradually appears and widens with increasing dose.
It's important to know that the Double Gaussian model is an approximation for the electron distribution during exposure.
Additionally development may be affected by feature size and aspect ratio, and that due to the finite contrast and process latitude of the resist, the perfect critical dimension at all scales may be hard to reach.
This is already apparent to the checkerboard pattern between dose 120 and 150.
At the lower dose, the apertures in the fine checkerboard are well defined, whereas the blanks in the large checkerboard are too large.
For the higher dose, the apertures in the large checkerboard are reduced, also still too large, but the fine checkerboard is already showing signs of overexposure.
Additionally, we only tune the dose of the written areas but cannot physically apply a negative dose in the non written areas that suffer from background exposure.
In a way, we are here limited to a dose leveling rather than a true correction.
Once the base dose is extracted from the 50% density pattern the ι parameter may be investigated.
Let's now have a look at this
CSAR, a positive resist with the base dose of 200μC/cm^2.
Inspecting the 0% loading one can see that Eta 0 the feature is still full of undeveloped resists.
Like shown here.
At Eta 0, hence there's no compensation to boost the dose for the low density pattern and the resist is therefor underexposed.
As Eta is increased, a back scattering contribution is assumed and a dose in low density area slowly rises.
At Eta 0.3, the fine checkerboard is very well defined. 
You can see here.
By increasing Eta further to 0.9, we can see the collapse of the fine checkerboard and the separation of the large 50nm squares.
Largely overexposed.
On the right you can see how the dose correction is applied for the different patterns and associated density.
It is interesting to know that if you look at the 100% loading pattern, the Eta 0.3 at 220 base dose provides good results on the checkerboard. 
But the large area written around shows a lot of remaining resist scum.
Increasing the dose further clears the large areas but the fine patterns are distorted.
This is again another illustration of process windows limitations.
Proximity effect correction should preferably be performed taking to account the actual density of the target patterns and shape corrections, or bias maybe used to further correct the exposure.
All the structures here are exposed and developed HSQ negative resist patterns imaged under a tilted angle in a scanning electron microscope.
From clockwise, top left you see first groups of four HSQ fins due to the 20kV acceleration voltage one can actually see through the HSQ structure.
The top right image shows arrays of HSQ posts exposed with single electron beam lithography shots.
The bottom right image shows triangular arrays of HSQ imaged at 2kV acceleration voltage.
And the bottom left image shows HSQ squares of two different thicknesses done by exposing successfully two different layers.
Very few lithography processes rely on a single layer alone.
Often we need to add a second layer of structured material with high precision to previous structure for example to make contact electrode to some nano wires.
To this end, reference markers are patent on the surface.
They allow aligning the electron beam in subsequent exposure steps.
In optical lithography, as you may remember these markers are imaged by optical methods.
The one-to-one transparent mask with the chrome pattern is then aligned mechanically by means of a high precision stage controlling X, Y and θ to correct for rotation and translation.
In electron beam lithography, the markers cannot be imaged optically, but as we know the e-beam tool is also functioning as a scanning electron microscope allowing to see the surface.
Due to large acceleration voltages, and associated penetration depths the markers, which are 10-20μm wide are either etched in the substrate, like shown here with the depth of several microns or made of a higher material to provide sufficient contrast.
In both cases, the tool finds the marker etch by monitoring signal variation.
But not looking at the marker itself but at the edge of the marker which gives a strong signal in the back scattered electron.
Also, markers maybe large, the typical marker edge detection accuracy is in the order of a few tens of nanometer.
Due to back scattering and the search range of the marker these shouldn't be positioned closer than a few hundreds of microns from the region of interest of being patterned.
Besides the SEM imaging approach, electron beam lithography also has another unique advantage when compared to the mask alignment schemes.
Indeed, a large number of markers per pattern may be used for redundancy and the patterns may be corrected beyond rotation and translation.
The dynamic nature of the electron beam lithography allows, for an example, for deformation of the design in order to project it on the base defined by the marker.
Well, this wraps up the lesson on the electron beam lithography.
We have seen the varied stages of the process starting from the design preparation, electron resist interaction, various resist properties as well as limitations, such as proximity effect, and how alignment is done.
In the accompanying exercises, you will have a chance train your knowledge and apply to some real application cases.
