We've seen in Session 2 that the construction of a World society is at stake in the current globalization process.
We've equally seen in this session that the emergence of individual actors paves the way to a novel, post-communal era: a society of individuals.
If we combine these two statements, we'll obtain: emergence of actors as individuals, society of individuals plus globalization, World-society, equal World-society of individuals.
The individual and the World entertain a strong emerging relationship to the detriment of communal allegiances.
In such ways, the individuals make their mark on the stage of the World’s globalization.
Conversely, the individual as a relevant social reality is also at stake in this event.
The globalized individual, is not the same individual who developed in Europe and in North America during the 19th and the 20th centuries.
The individual is an active operator in the globalization process, especially through their mobility, and their practice of telecommunication.
However, this process is simultaneously changing their nature.
The notion of identity may help an understanding of what's happening.
Norbert Elias was the first author to associate, for fundamental theoretical reasons, the emergence of the individual and globalization.
In a society of individuals, the individual became the primary actor of globalization.
Following Elias, the society of individuals and the World-society are in fact one and the same thing.
It's true that there can be a society of individuals, as distinct from communal societies, at other levels than the world.
However, on the one hand, globalization contributes to relativizing the national, infra-national, or even trans-national levels at which communal ties have operated.
On the other hand, and in a symmetrical fashion, the World presents itself as a space of freedom open to new modes of organization in which individual logics can assert themselves.
However, let's say that these types of statements do not validate methodological individualism, or radical interpretations of the liberal legacy.
Saying that the role and weight of individuals is increasing doesn't imply that society is losing its relevance.
On the contrary, in ‘Gemeinschaft’-type societies, communal groups not only take in hand the destinies of individuals, but also every single aspect of social solidarity.
By contrast, in systems with strong individuals, social relations are expressed through a multitude of institutions - state or non-state -, such as social security, education, political life, and so on.
This appears everywhere, in the developed world, including the United States, where it is only the classical, European-style polarity towards the state that is relatively diminished.
It is thus logical that the globalized individual can no longer be the same individual as the one that slowly emerged from the heart of social configurations that structurally limited its role.
The geopolitical state, the most accomplished communal structure, consumed and destroyed the life of its subjects, while imposing brutal limits to personal fulfillment.
At the same time, however, the emergence of the welfare state, and the establishment of a democracy that was explicitly designed as a response to the ‘blood tax’ provided by ordinary inhabitants offered dramatically new opportunities for the emergence of individual autonomy.
The new times of individual identities are prospering with this relativization of allegiances and of the scales of these allegiances.
We then can call alter-identities the global individual's mode of identification.
The encounter between a theoretical hypothesis about the empowerment of individuals and the observation of a historically-situated, empirical reality leads to suggest that the notion of alter-identity - in Latin, ‘alter’ means ‘other’ - signifies both the hybridization of otherness and identity, as well as an alternative way to deal with the usual ways of managing their relations of the self with the others.
Said differently, what this term is about is simultaneously the us-them, and the me-you couples.
Beyond the abundance and richness of theoretical debates about idenitites in geography, it may be argued that the alter-identity framework can be a useful boost and can allow us to go beyond notions of intersectionalism or situatedness, which appear to be just a refinement of the classical structuralist perspective.
In ‘Oneself as Another’, in 1992, Paul Ricoeur analyzed two different types of identity: ‘mêmeté’(sameness) and ‘ipséité’ (selfness).
In the first case, a being whose essential features remain identical forever, the fixedness and differentiation towards another is fundamental.
In the second case, the identification process constructs itself through an iterative dynamic between an individual and the outer world.
Even though this reflection was formulated by Ricoeur without reference to history and to recent evolution of contemporary societies, it's arguable that ‘ipséité’ individual psyches is more developed today.
The decline of automatic allegiances creates hybrids combining ‘Gemeinschaft’ (communal) and ‘Gesellschaft’(individual)-type elements.
In fact, even if this occurs in a certain state of confusion, and even if spectacular communal movements such as: Fundamental Christianity, 
Radical Islamism,
European, North or South American Nationalisms, and African ethnic conflicts occupy the front stage, the progressive emancipation from non-chosen and irreversible group allegiances is clearly the major event.
This great crossing from a world to another represents a major issue for the anthropology of hybridization.
Increases in the individuals’ leeway, in the face of their environments’ constraints and resources, affect the very construction of identity.
This evolves into two converging directions.
A more marked lifetime self-transformability and an increase of intentionality in the dynamic of the psyche.
Contemporary notions of identity appear less opposed to a reflexive consciousness and to the kind of ambitious projects thereby made possible.
As far as their social capital allows them to make strategic choices, individuals can define their expectations in different ways.
Those that make them move, for example, towards various projects of personal development, as well as those that pertain to the field of conservation, of resistance to what they see as vital social benefits.
They can be self- or family-centered, with various family size and values or conversely a matter of professional or voluntary involvement.
And all those orientations can be hosted by the same individual, simultaneously or successively.
Identity is no longer an a-priori condition, but tends to become a permanent form of self-construction.
Identities are provisional stabilizations, which evolve in relation to the pace of the dis-equilibrating dynamics acceptable by a given personality.
These imbalances and the risks they generate are increasingly understood as an inevitable counterpart of the supplementary degrees of freedom that the individuals have acquired in the fabrication of themselves.
In this context, the spatial components of identity are also logically touched upon. ‘Here’ and ‘there’ cannot be defined once and for all anymore.
Classically, geographers conceived of the identity tie between the individual and a place as univocal. ‘To everybody, their place’ is a postulate, often translated into the metaphor of rootedness.
It is an obvious identification between the tree and the soil, it's natural and easy to be taken for granted.
The near and the local would then govern identity.
However, the appropriation of multiple geographical places, through mobility or by other means, throws this model into question.
All anchoring places can possibly be good clients for an identification carried out by an individual, due as much to its spatial extension, as to the complexity of its determinants. the ordinary actors’ spatial system has a comparable, or more often, a superior size to the society in which they principally evolves.
Individual identities may thus, not merely be seen as little things placed inside a big box.
They may also be considered as organized and orientated layers of space, possessing a specific dynamic, as indeed, geography and sociology have convincingly demonstrated since the first works of the Chicago School in urban research in the early 20th century.
This leads to the proposition, according to which, ‘here’ does not correspond to a single stable substance.
On the contrary, there are many ‘heres’ in motion, which, when taken together, contribute to an individual's relation to space.
Any type of place can become a referent for identity. ‘Here’ can thus be defined as a spatial component of identity.
In a symmetrical way, ‘there’ could be said to constitute the spatial component of otherness.
Alter-identity then seems to be a phenomenon for which globalization is the most favorable environment for its emergence and development.
The dynamic of the relation between identity and otherness, is, at the same time, a consequence and a component of globalization.
Thinking beyond this, however, certain characteristics of globalization make possible the appropriation by individuals of a bigger, but, paradoxically, more easily penetrable World.
By reducing the magnitude of differences, by creating new singularities at every scale, and by confirming big cities as concentrates of the World, globalization offers an enlarged palette for experiencing this setting in motion of individual identities.
In this context, anthropologists have signaled the appearance of diverse combinations of identification processes, fabricated with bricks of various nature.
This is the end of exoticism, with a triumph of complex patchworks, hybrids, and cross-breeds. 
The notion of environment, in the sense of an encompassing reality in interaction with realities it encompasses, as we've seen in 
Session 1, is useful here.
The description of the World as a differentiated space is then passed on to the study of diverse environments, articulated in various ways amongst each other, and not necessarily in a nesting mode, but also through co-spatiality within a unique place.
The possible agency in these different environments constitutes the dashboard of individuals, who are yet also components of these environments.
Intensity and speed of dynamics, then, depend less on the reciprocal influence of the environment, taken as a whole, than on the capacity of actors to activate the elements of one environment that could serve their projects, potentially achieved in another environment.
The world of individuals is, thus, per excellence, any kind of place, including the World itself.
From the body to the planet the individual is actively present; he or she is a privileged courier of spatialities, namely by, his or her ability to cross borders, beyond the terrible dangers that this may imply, and the fact that these crossings are not always desired, but often forced.
Similarly, the capability to jump from one scale to another, or from one spatial layer to another, is remarkable in itself and because of the powerful impact it has on social interactions, and cultural hybridization.
This is not a completely new reality, but what's new is that this issue is present, more or less, and in a highly uneven fashion for every individual, and not only to a tiny minority of great travelers or great intellectuals.
The world of individuals was practiced even during the Holocaust, in spite of its planned and obscene extermination of entire populations and its negation of the existence of individuals as human beings.
Imre Kertész knew how to describe a life where the loss of control over one's own body in no way meant a lack of activity, but involved a life dominated by an interminable slowness, punctuated by little choice.
For Kertész, ‘fatelessness’ means having the power to act and to have the influence on the future of one's existence without everything being decided beforehand.
The paradox lies in the fact that this horizon was constructed in a world where freedom, was, nevertheless, radically banned.
This is a power to move forward ‘step by step’, as he says, if only to decide about whether it's best to take the bus or the tram to go to Auschwitz.
Kertész blames those who give up, pretending that ‘things happen’, that is to say, fall upon us without having been there for nothing. ‘Thinking after Auschwitz’ is saying that in a society of individuals, even when crushed by a brutal and violently imposed weight, the individual can resist, and, as incredible as it can appear, can live intensely, as such, and not only in their own mind.
If we follow Kertész's leading thread, we finally understand that, in these camps, the effort to make the self exist doesn't consist of plunging into the horror, to pull from it a certain grandeur, but, paradoxically, in seeking against all odds to create an unlikely banality, which permits an access, if only for brief moments, to rhythms, landmarks, temporary identifications and pleasant or unpleasant micro-events which contribute to build a marvelous daily grayness.
We have noticed that globalization clearly has an economic dimension, but not only.
All aspects of social life are present in this invention of a World-scale space.
It's a dangerous mistake to reduce globalization to flows of money or to the expansion of companies.
The arrangement of social groups, politics, science, art or technology, are also at stake, in all stages of globalization.
And the role of individuals helps us not to forget this multi-dimensional aspect of global dynamics.
Since late 2010, the Arab Spring, especially in Tunisia and Egypt, has shown a new kind of political movement, based on individual-driven, reversible groups.
The 2009 pacific protests in Iran have sometimes been called ‘Tweeter Revolution’.
In democratic countries, de-aligned political movements: ‘Los Indignados’ in Spain, ‘Occupy’ in the 
United States, in 2011 and 2012, have shown comparable features.
In Turkey, the 2013 ‘Taksim-Gezi Park’ protest movement made visible a new side of political agency and transcended the common partisan splits.
In Ukraine, the ‘Maidan Movement’, which succeeded in overthrowing the President and his regime, was mostly composed of self-organized, self-assigned people, coming from different socioeconomic and geographic layers of the Ukrainian society.
In the case of the Arab Spring, whose impact is ambivalent, we can identify different types of processes and outcomes.
In different cases, the importance of this new kind of movement is indisputable.
In this perspective, we can construct a theoretical framework to elaborate a sociology of globalization, and of the global society which takes into account both the global and other scales.
No individual, of course, has a 
100% grip on their own life, and the weight of economic, political, or cultural limitations to their freedom of self-invention should definitely not be forgotten.
What can be said, however, is firstly that between zero and 100, there are many interesting intermediate situations that deserve to be explored.
Secondly, we can say that this mix between freedom and constraint cannot be described by a single aspect, such as, for instance, income.
The relation between the individual and the World, actually as it can be observed, suggests that the interpretation of social ties should be reformulated to integrate their spatial dimension.
This is true in any geographic configuration.
In fact, globalization gives a new significance to spatial competences.
This table shows the relative dependence between economic capital and spatial capital in a globalizing World.
It illustrates how people with little economic capital, but much spatial capital - the ‘plugged-In’, for example; international migrants who already have experience of otherness and often benefit from consistent support from, for example, relatives and from fellow countryman and women at their port of entry, may often develop a winning strategy of social ascent, while those who are here called the ‘entrenched’, for example, workers with a protected status in a developed country are, when faced with globalization, poor geographical actors despite their relatively privileged economic position.
Let's go back to a table we had introduced in the first session.
As we saw, countries, that is, territories surrounded by clear border lines, are by far not the only observable situation.
Networks are very common, as well as fuzzy limits.
Moreover, since they include an infinity of parts, territories have been mere utopias for a long period and states are forced to spend huge amounts of money to turn borders into efficient lock-out fences.
By the way, the practical way to create territories is generally the construction of dense, thick networks.
Networks are precisely effective in each dimension of social life and for each actor.
Spacial agency, what we've called spatiality is essentially made of networks, and in networks.
Networks are typically individual spaces.
In this perspective, we should give particular attention to ‘rhizomes’.
This term is derived from Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari's notion developed in their book, ‘A Thousand Plateaus’, first published in 1980.
A rhizome is a borderless network.
This concept expresses the individual's capability to both develop weak ties with unknown people - ‘friends’ in digital social networks - and largely accept the transitivity of these ties.
My acquaintances' acquaintances are my acquaintances too.
That's why in small worlds where interaction systems are random, unlikely encounters often happen, like in the book by David Lodge, ‘Small Worlds’.
Transforming a network into a territory (that is, adding continuity, contiguity, and exhaustivity), or even a place (a space freed from relevant distances), is not a trivial or an easy task. 
It requires resources and determination.
Is the World becoming a territory and a place too?
Its inhabitants only will eventually decide.
