As we've said in the first session, human bodies have three major spatial characteristics.
First, they are multisensorial sensors.
Secondly, they are mobile in contrast with some objects and environments they interact with.
And finally, they're vulnerable.
They can be destroyed either by natural causes or social operators, at the risk of the annihilation of their ‘inhabitant’ that is, the human being.
We can then consider the human body as the primary environment of the self.
It is an environment in the dual sense that it conditions the actors agency and is simultaneously modifiable by this actor.
Our psyche is made possible by the existence of our body and especially by our brain.
However, we know how important ourselves’ feedback is on our body, the psychosomatic dimension of illness is now identified as crucial and placebos seem to figure among the most efficient medicines.
My body preconditions me but I can change my body too.
Given this body is a multisensorial, mobile and fragile device, it constitutes a major component of our spatial style.
Although it is not technically unthinkable, it is difficult for us to imagine a body-free way of life.
Our spatiality is, at least so far, profoundly impacted by the fact that our body operates as a pervasive, invasive mediator in our relationship to the outer world.
One of the most significant aspects of what is often called the digital revolution, is that we can more easily keep our body off an increasing part of our activities, including those that require interactions with objects or other humans.
The huge importance of large spectrum sex-oriented individual performances that take place on the web is particularly intriguing.
This tendency towards the de-embodying of interactions helps us understand, through its opposite, how critical the presence of bodies is to define the uniqueness of public space.
We'll examine this point in session five.
Let's keep in memory, anyway, the simple fact that human bodies are not alone, but often in interaction with other human bodies.
In his work, namely his famous book, ‘The Hidden Dimension’, published in 1971,
Edward T. Hall proposed as early as 1963, the following definition of ‘proxemy’:
In this perspective, inter-body distances are to be considered at least according to two different scales:
First, at their level, either contact, remoteness, convergence, or divergence, border or a continuum between bodies.
Second, at the societal scale.
Hall, and other scholars, have tried to identify contact and non-contact societies, and this empirical field has still to be seriously documented.
As Erving Goffman has eloquently shown, the arrangement of bodies is strongly related to the general organization of society, and space turns out to be an excellent intellectual vehicle to explore individual society relationships.
With and beyond the bodies, there is a spatial dimension to this emergence of the individual actor.
Let's introduce the notion of spatial capital.
Spatial capital is a species of social capital, non reducible to other species.
When using spatial practice it provides social value by offering competence in their relations to spaces and spatialities.
This competence is obtained through both heritages of the experience of places or geographical practices, and capability: the aptitude to manage new spatial situations.
Spatial capital is a significant component of an actor’s social capital and can be exchanged with other capitals.
A space may have spatial capital too, in terms of stock and flows.
For example, a city can take advantage of its location and develop its relations with other spaces.
It can also foster its attractiveness towards various spatial actors.
By putting forward the idea that there is not one, but at least three types of capitals to define the social position of an individual,
Pierre Bourdieu opened up a discussion that can serve to explore the complexity of sociological contexts.
The notion of spatial capital is located within this perspective.
It allows the taking account of an integration of both stocks of experience and acting capacities.
