We already introduced you to co-composting
 for faecal sludge treatment.
This is a relatively slow process, and to produce compost, may not always have a high market value.
In this module we are going to introduce you to two new processes, called vermi and fly composting, that have the potential to be quicker and produce treatment products with a higher market value.
Such as the black soldier fly shown behind me.
Following this module, you will be able to explain the treatment process and operation of vermi- and fly larvae composting.
Name advantages and disadvantages these processes can have over co-composting.
And discuss important considerations for the implementation.
Vermi and fly larvae composting are processes that use worms and flies for sludge stabilization
(INAUDIBLE) management in addition to microorganisms used in co-composting 
Vermi and fly larvae composting are two processes that are currently being researched and piloted for faecal sludge.
Currently, the knowledge for faecal sludge is limited to laboratory, bench scale and pilot scale studies and most research has been conducted with faeces.
Faeces can have very different characteristics to faecal sludge collected from pit latrines and septic tanks.
Vermi and fly larvae composting processes are being transferred to faecal sludge from the treatment of organic solid waste which is market waste, restaurant waste or manures.
For these wastes, more knowledge and a few examples of full-scale implementation exists.
Vermi composting, which is also called worm composting uses worms for sludge stabilization.
Worms can have (INAUDIBLE) with faecal sludge include Eisenia Fetida which is also called tiger worms or red wiggler.
And Eudrius Eugenia, which is also called the African nightcrawler.
With organic solid wastes,
Lubricus Rubellus is also common.
These worms are selected for vermi-composting because they can survive, grow, feed and reproduce on a variety of different feed-stocks and they grow very quickly.
This is a picture of Eisenia Fetida.
If you would like to do vermi-composting and you need worms.
You're likely to find them in manures or compost.
Once placed in a feed-stock, such as faecal sludge, worms start to feed on it to meet their energy needs, grow and reproduce.
Anything that the worms do not take up during this digestion process in their gut they will poop out as a solid residual that we call vermi-compost.
Operation of vermi-composting is commonly in batch or semi-batch.
This means that worms are fed once with faecal sludge or a smaller batches every day.
Under favorable environment or conditions, worm will directly reproduce within the waste, and need to be separated from the residue after faecal sludge has been processed into vermi-compost.
This picture shows such a batch process at a research facility in the Philippines.
In these rectangular boxes, a mixture of manure, shredded cornstarch and faeces are being vermi-composted with Eisenia Fetida.
Three studies in Mexico, the Philippines and India, assess vermi-composting of faecal sludge collected from septic tanks and faeces.
These studies highlighted worms required bedding material for proper development.
In India, worms do not lie in faeces without a bedding material below the faeces, such as solid compost.
In vermi-composting of solid waste paper and cardboard are also commonly used.
Worms also did not feed and survive on untreated sludge but required faecal sludge that was pre-digested.
The research also identified that high ammonia concentration faecal sludge can be toxic to worms and hamper their development.
Let's move to another fascinating animal use in faecal sludge treatment.
The black soldier fly.
The black soldier fly can be found in most temperate and tropical climates.
In comparison to other flies, it has the benefit that it doesn't feed during its adult life.
This means it will likely not move between different waste and sit on waste that could contain pathogens and transmit it through environment which could transmit diseases.
In waste treatment, black soldier flies are usually reared in cages as shown here at a pilot-scale for (INAUDIBLE) in Nairobi.
In these cages, flies are kept in conditions that foster mating between male and female flies.
Following mating, female flies like to lay their eggs in protected place.
To provide such an environment, treatment operators commonly provide perforated cardboard to lay their eggs, as shown here.
This picture shows the egg following a removal from the cardboard.
On this picture you can see a few million eggs.
Under favorable environmental conditions, within the next three days, a few million small larvae with the size around one millimeter will hatch from these eggs, and hungry for food.
Once placed on an organic waste feed-stock, such as faecal sludge, the larvae will start processing this waste for the next weeks, to meet their energy needs and grow.
As they do not feed during their adult lives as a fly, they have a really big appetite during their life stage as a larvae.
This video shows the black soldier fly larvae feeding on faeces during research in Upsala, Sweden.
Based on bench and pilot scale testing in Sweden, Thailand and Kenya, with faeces and faecal sludge from septic tanks, fly larvae can reduce the mass of sludge during this period by between 40-50% based on dry weight.
The feeding of fly larvae with waste such as faecal sludge, is commonly done in boxes.
And larvae is either fed once or every few days.
The boxes and the feeding are shown here, at a treatment facility, in China, where restaurant waste is treated with black soldier fly larvae.
Based on research in Sweden and Kenya, black soldier fly larvae commonly convert between 10-20% of the sludge based on dry weight into body mass.
This factor is called the bio-conversion rate.
In other words, it means that following the processing of 1000 kilo of total solids, around 100-200 kilo of dried larvae can be expected.
Are you excited about fly larvae and vermi-composting?
Here are some important considerations that are relevant for its implementation.
As with other biological processes, such as co-composting, that rely on living organisms, worms and fly larvae only feed, grow and reproduce if the suitable environmental conditions are being provided.
In short, keep your worms and fly larvae happy.
For example, both fly larvae and worms do not like light, and should be kept in a shaded place.
They also like environments with sufficient supplies of oxygen, and pH, temperature, and humidity are important environmental factors.
The available literature on the (INAUDIBLE) organic solid waste and faecal sludge suggested a performance really depending on feed-stock characteristics microorganisms, environmental conditions, and treatment operations, and can be really variable.
It therefore best to determine these parameters through local bench and pilot-scale tests before upscaling.
In this module we introduce you to vermi and fly larvae composting.
Two new processes that are currently in research and being implemented with faecal sludge at a bench and pilot-scale.
In these processes, worms and fly larvae feed on faecal sludge and produce animal protein that has a high market value in compost.
Based on the current level of knowledge, the two processes that achieve low level pathogen inactivation in comparison to co-composting and the compost and the worm and larvae products require further treatment.
