What is an archive? 
You can use 2 metaphors. 
Firstly, it is interesting to think of the archive like a living organism.
An archive has its own story.
An archive changes over time.
It moves around in space. 
It modifies itself, it restructures.
It is impossible 
To deal with an archive, if you cannot understand its singularity.
And its singularity precisely comes from this long evolution which allows it to be what it is.
Another way to see an archive, is to use a spacial metaphor.
An archive is an amount. 
A volume that contains other volumes.
These volumes can be books, registers. tables.
3D objects.
The big challenge of the archive is to organise in one amount these amounts.
For example, here we have the State archive in Venice.
80km of documents that describes 1000 years of history.
This archive in the world is very  unusual because Venice in 1000 years has been able to maintain a political organisation that allows it to develop a continuous memory.
This is translated by a series of documentaries. which is spread over time and that allows us to approach the long  time period.
This is also translated by, for example millions of maps.
Maps that are now like forests, that we need to build again,
And interrogates them, to understand their logic tut which, potentially help us reconstruct at a high granular level the world before us.
Which kind of document do we find in this kind of archive?
There are administrative documents, notaires documents, wills.
You can find information on the evolution of the town. on what transformations have taken place.
All these elements were for a long time kept in different places in Venice. it is only, in the 19th century that they were gathered together. in a huge building.
And today, the State archive is in the old convent.
300 rooms, 80km. of shelf space. a labyrinth of space where all the memory of the Venice Republic
Is contained.
We're speaking about the history of the town. but also of the history of Europe. which is implicitly memorised in these archives.
The challenge is to transform these corridors of documents into an informational system.
To make this transformation happen,
We can proceed in 3 stages.
The first stage is to create images.
Millions of images, of all these documents. which is what we call digitalisation.
The second involves indexing, finding words input, signs that will allow us to look through these documents.
The indexing.
Third stage, make a big graph that connects all the information which to each other people, places.
One of the main uses would be to create a search engine that allows us to create a service as simple to use as modern search engines.
I want to look for the name of a Venetian.
Battista Nani for example. and find documents that talk about this person.
That seems to be something simple but today, this work demands from the archivists and historians hours of research.
So, the State archive this administrative memory informs us about all the mechanics of power, the whole structure of the town, all the exchanges with the exterior.
There is also something
 when we we want to rebuild the past.
And that is at the Cini foundation we can find a background complementary with the documents that make the iconographical background.
In this other place in Venise. once again, we find miles of documents but this time, another kind of document.
1 million photos of pieces of art. covering a very long time frame and that document for Venice, but also for the rest of Italy and also for the reste of Europe
The images pieces of art in the broadest sense.
We are talking about paintings, about sculptures. we are talking about the interior of buildings.
These two resources, the State archive on one hand and the Cini Foundation on the other. are going to allow us to do an experiment and allow us to progressively imagine the constitution of an informational systems that combines these 2 kinds of information to progressively rebuild the density of the past.
