How can we realize the 3D model of a city in the past?
First we have to collect all historical iconographic sources from which we extract the shape of each buildings some better than others and where the plan is not necessarily visible.
This map is an iconographic view called bird eye view.
It doesn't have exact geometry measurements in the plan and it has many perspective aberrations
It was made by
Jacopo de' Barbari in 1500 and it's an important prototype in the history of cartography.
In this map, the model of the Rialto district is very standard design because it's not important to precise the shape of each building the model serves only as a search engine for access to documents.
For example, when we go into the warehouse of the german community we can click on some specific places in the building making it appear all the documents in which this place and persons that lived there were mentioned.
We have seen how to make a prototype of the 3D model of a city by a bird eye view.
All iconographic sources made at a give time.
What happens when we add its evolutions over time.
We start the modeling of Venice from one of the most ancient area of the city.
Rialto was founded, according to the legend, in the 5th century.
The first documentary sources however begin in the 10th century.
Redesign models as standardized as possible.
The sources used are primary sources - texts and documents - and secondary.
It means historical interpretation from some documents.
We see the first bridge on wooden boards, the first warehouse of german community with three courtyards the rise of the main churches of the island and the progressive paving of channels and pools.
The new model of Rialto bridge from a painting of the late 15th century end the district progressive growth because in the 1500 the view by
Jacopo de' Barbari testifies what was build with an impressive density for that time.
First fire in the warehouse of the germans in 1505 and then the reconstruction.
Second fire in the neighborhood in 1514 which destroyed a very important part of the district.
Then a number of less obvious changes because after the great reconstruction until the mid of the 16th century we can see that it led to remain no less similar than the present.
