In this first episode, we are going to look together at the basic concept of financial planning.
This is about assessing several things.
On the one hand, the needs of a protected area, identifying possible revenue, funding deficiencies.
Then studying preconditions for the set up of any financial mechanism.
Is this possible?
Feasible?
Do institutional, legislative conditions, the capacity of a protected area lead it to the establishment of a certain mechanism?
And finally to consolidate everything, it is recommended to develop a business plan; we will look at that together in part three.
First and foremost, let's look at financial requirements.
When identifying financial requirements, note that it is important on the one hand, to make the link between the management plan's objectives, in terms of activity, required investment, and this, based on needs and priorities over time, and I will come back to this soon.
Secondly, to study opportunities to reduce costs, optimization.
Also to take into account the effectiveness of the financial management system of a protected area, that is the accounting system, the classification of expenditure, cash flow management, transparency of financial data and the requirements of audits.
I cannot emphasize enough, the need for good skills when it comes to the financial management for a protected area.
Also to analyse carefully the actual financial situation of previous years.
But keep in mind that budgets for protected areas are generally determined, depending on available funds and not on the actual needs of a protected area.
This management by default is of course a pragmatic one, but it does not always allow us to see good results on the field, hence the need to set up a business plan.
And finally, extrapolating future needs.
As I have mentioned, the financial needs of a protected area are to be evaluated depending on the management plan's goals and activities.
But you will have noted that a protected area's financial needs are also dependent on its life cycle.
Financial needs and priorities are not the same throughout the life of a protected area.
Let's look at a fictional example of a protected area's budget over 20 years.
At the very beginning of the life cycle of the protected area in the identification phase, we note the great financial needs for monitoring, for scientific expertise, to determine baseline situations.
Fairly important needs also in consultation with the communities, with all interested parties.
Then, in the creation phase, often supported by donors, by projects.
It is at this time that the infrastructure of the protected area is built, that personnel is recruited, which are important needs.
Then throughout the operations, of the protected area in an operational phase, budgets are more or less balanced.
However, you will note the differences.
For example, here, with a tourism project, a donor project most likely.
A little further on, we have a community development project.
Still a little further on, a conservation project or a restoration project.
You can see that these different projects involve jumps in the budget of a protected area.
You will have understood that on the basis of identifying the protected area's needs, the identification of plausible sources of finance, we can identify the shortfall, the funding gap.
Before searching for potential funding, it is important to look at preconditions, on the one hand, in society, in that country, and also the protected area's own capacities.
Firstly we will look at the preconditions on a macro level.
Are the roles and the values of the sites and ecosystems assessed and shared by all?
Do general policies fully recognise the roles and values of the MPA?
And have laws been adopted that implement these PUBLIC policies?
Are there technical capacities, abilities, able to develop certain financing options?
And finally, is there a system of governance that provides and emphasizes the values of transparency, responsibility and confidence?
The key questions to ask.
Firstly a practical question.
Which mechanism can be set up the most efficiently?
Then, we look at the current legal and administrative provisions of the country which can allow for the SET UPof the new mechanism.
Are difficulties anticipated in administrating, implementing, in raising or distributing funds?
Look to see if this new mechanism will be seen as fair and legitimate.
And I emphasize this point: the financial collection mechanism must be seen to be fair and legitimate by all the parties involved.
We look at the support by the interested stakeholders and government for setting up this new mechanism.
And finally, we remain vigilant to the environmental impact of this mechanism on the protected area's goods and services.
To consolidate all this information, we will prepare what we call a business plan.
The business plan is used in all sectors of the economy.
It serves to compare different options and to study the financial viability of a certain initiative.
Adapted to protected areas, the business plan allows us to maximize environmental results with an often limited financial contribution.
It allows the comparison between different options in the long term and future planning, to better plan incomes and financial needs of a protected area.
The business plan must allow to put into perspective over five to ten years, on the one hand, expected expenditure, investments, personnel, operations, activities, and on the other hand, expected revenue, self-financing, national budget, donors and projects and other mechanisms.
Note that is a tool of internal management which gives us a technical and financial long term vision.
You will have noted that protected area budgets are generally determined based on available funds.
A business plan allows us to implement and identify the actual needs of a protected area.
It allows us to determine priority investments.
Also, don't forget, the business plan, allows us to communicate and present a clear and concise view of the activity of a protected area in the long term and to show financial needs.
Here you can see a fictional example, once again, of a business plan.
Don't be concerned with all the numbers, it's just to give you an idea.
This table has been adapted from the business plan of the Iwokrama protected area in Guyana.
You will note that expenditure is organized based on activity programs. conservation expenses, administration, Etc. it's a good thing.
This allows us to make the connection with the management plan.
You will note that revenue is defined as best as possible according to information, and outlook, and total revenue, whether from sales, tourism revenue, merchandise, and handicrafts, is recorded and extrapolated over the coming years.
Finally, you'll note that we can identify... the gap, the shortcomings, throughout the five years of the business plan.
THEN It's about, for THE protected area, to identify fundraising actions marketing and external relations to bridge this gap.
The procedure to elaborate the business plan is well defined in this guide which I suggest you take a look at.
It is a guide on how to formulate a simplified business plan for protected areas written by Benjamin Landreau for FIBA.
Note particularly the different stages.
Firstly, define the process of the business plan.
Who is in charge?
What consultations are necessary?
Then, analyze past financial execution.
Then, determine the medium and long term needs, investments, operating expenses, salaries, staffing requirements.
Then, indicate the existing sources of finance and extrapolate potential revenue.
Finally, analyze the funding gap and different possible scenarios and evaluate other sources of funding.
This episode has given you the basics on financial planning.
Note that striving for financial sustainability is essential for a protected area.
It is about identifying financial requirements in the long term, studying and evaluating the preconditions of the country, the site and the protected area itself and to define financing options.
And all this generally within the framework of a business plan.
Several reference manuals are available.
I have suggested one of them.
I also invite you to have a look at the UNDP's
BIOFIN website, the work of the TEEB initiative, mine is blue, this is green, but...
The Economy of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, a guide which will be available very soon,
Financial Planning for National Systems of
Protected Areas, and finally, the reference guide, Sustainable
Financing of Protected Areas,
A Global Review of Challenges and Options.
We have reached the end of this episode.
I suggest you have a look at the reference materials and I wish you a good day.
