Hello.
In this episode, we are going to study the concept of the value of a protected area.
As in, which goods and services have a value?
What is this value?
How do we measure it, how do we quantify it?
Finally, which methods should we use?
Protected areas have ecological goods and services that have an ecological value.
That is why they are protected.
But they also have social, cultural and economic values.
And they can be for different groups, for different levels of populations, for communities, for the state, for the whole of humanity.
Each of these levels place a value on these goods and services.
But be careful, you can't put a price on the environment, of course.
Several guidelines and documents are available for you to refer to.
On the one hand, I recommend the FFEM's valuation report on its Marine
Protected Areas projects, and especially Section 8:
Economic Valuation and Calculation of the rate of return of AMP Projects.
There's also IUCN's guidelines:
Economic Values of Protected Areas: Guidelines for Protected Area Managers
These guidelines were written in 1998, and so the methods probably need a little update, but the basics are in there.
Economic valuation of a protected area's goods and services involves identifying its goods and services and quantifying and measuring their value.
First of all, we need to identify these goods and services.
What are they?
And who are they for?
We will look at placing a value on these goods and services for the groups involved.
And finally, we will consider whether or not the benefits of these goods and services are being received and by whom, by which groups?
Are some groups receiving the benefits more than others, and that's why the protected areas are threatened?
Let's look at it together.
Why do we need to assess the value of the goods and services of a protected area?
It is to justify important investments that are needed to protect a site.
The decision makers, i.e., the state most often, will need to make decisions between different investments ; a protected area and an education system for example.
It's about demonstrating that protecting a site produces important values.
Applying economic methods to assess the value of services linked to the environment therefore allows us to compare the costs and the benefits of a protected area or the extent to which an ecosystem has improved.
It enables us to compare different uses and different scenarios.
Notice that the studies are not yet widly spread in this field, but they are informative.
It is also noticeable that nearly everywhere managing long term resources and ecosystems is more cost-effective and profitable than exploiting these goods and services in the short term.
For example, in Canada, overfishing of cod drove the collapse of stocks.
In the short term, the fishing industry gained an enormous amount of money, but the stock has run out, and that cost the state in social expenditure more than two billion dollars, mainly to compensate fishermen.
These two billion would have been quite useful and would have easily been enough to develop a strict and sustainable management system for this fishing industry.
Notice that the valuation of these goods and services does not necessarily result in a financial flow that guarantees sustainability and protection of the site.
Measures must be taken to capture these values and to generate revenue that will enable the site to be protected and the sustainable development for communities.
I've already highlighted that economic valuation involves identifying and assessing the quantitative value of the goods and services.
We're talking about exchange value, the price of a good or service on the market, of the use value of the good or service.
This could be different from the market price.
For example, water has an important value in use, but its exchange value per cubic meter of water is low.
There is also the emotional value that we attach to certain goods and services.
So we talk about a total economic value, that breaks down, as you can see here, into the use value and the non-use value.
Frequently, only the use value is taken into account and monetized.
The use value is what you identify through fishing, tourism, leisure revenues etc.
Indirect use value is coastal protection, sewage treatment, waste treatment, or erosion control.
There are also option values, which could be the interests of pharmaceutical industries, who look to preserve ecosystems that are not yet well known.
They would do this to exploit genes and plants for medicine.
Note also that in the non-use values, there is the existence value, which is the habitat itself, the beauty of the site, which we should not forget.
We also identify the bequest value, which is the preservation of resources for future generations.
If the concept of total economic value technique is relevant for helping decision-making, it is important to remember the limitations of these methods and of the technique itself.
On one hand, notice that the technique is considered from a human point of view.
The intrinsic value of biodiversity or the value that an animal species would place on another species or habitat is not taken into account.
Notice also that different groups can place different values to the same good or service.
The obvious example is the antelope.
Some might place the value as just looking at the antelope and others might prefer to eat it.
Calculating a total economic value therefore generally brings with it problems with conflict of values, and sometimes, with double-counting, or with values not taken into account.
Finally, note that it is a long, difficult and expensive exercise.
Frequently, it is not necessary to conduct a full study.
It could therefore be useful to conduct relevant analysis that depend on the manager's needs.
For example, it could be only on the use values.
Putting a price on the environment is not simple.
Despite the difficulties, economists have suggested multiple methods to assess the value of an environmental asset.
Before anything else, it is important to define the good's user and client for that situation.
Is it the protected area's inhabitants, those who live on its outskirts, the government, the country's businesses, the NGOs, the international community etc?
After that, we need to frame, confirm the study's limits, the timeframe, the data and the available budget.
Finally, the valuation method needs to be chosen.
Regarding the method, the easiest is to refer to the economic values of the market to measure the direct use values, for example, the value of the protected area, in terms of the tourism service, is measured by hotel nights, rights of entry and the location of vehicles.
When no market exists, we will try to estimate the value that the clients and users can place on that good.
We could directly ask those involved.
This method is called a contingent valuation and it generally relies on their willingness to pay.
We would ask them,
"How much would you be prepared to give to save pandas?
To have clean beaches?"
We often use this method for existence or option values.
They are however subject to a lot of criticism.
The other option is to observe the behavior of those involved.
Some of the methods used are the following.
The hedonic valuation: we compare the price that the consumers are prepared to pay for goods that are similar, but in different environments.
For example, to determine the value of the sea, we assess the difference in price between two similar apartments, but where only one has a sea view.
The method for the cost of transport: we estimate the value that people place on a good by measuring how much they spend in terms for transport.
We can also look at and value their spending on protection and restoration.
We measure the cost of the deterioration of the environment, by calculating how much we would have to pay to replace or restore that good.
Notice that none of these methods really meet our full satisfaction from a theory perspective, and in practice, it isn't much better, since several methods employed simultaneously can amount to different results.
We must therefore be cautious.
But considerable progress has been made in this area, and the valuation tool is essential to help the decision-makers to make the choices that need to be made.
In terms of case studies, there are relatively many economic studies on coral reef ecosystems.
Here is one that you will also find in your course documents.
Here, an example of a study on the total economic value of coral reefs, mangroves, and seagrass in Martinique.
This document is also in your course documents.
Please note that the use values linked to fishing and tourism have been well documented, such as for example, this study on iQoliqoli in Fiji.
I said it in the introduction, identifying goods and giving them a value is not enough to ensure that large revenues are generated for the protected area.
It is a question of capturing the value of the goods and services of a protected area.
For example, by using taxes on the use of the protected area's resources, i.e., access fees.
For tourism, it is clearer: entrance fees, concessions on infrastructures, taxes, fees for tours.
For a service, such as carbon sequestration from mangroves, it's more complicated: there is the REDD+ project.
They are difficult projects to design, to develop.
Finally, for example, for scientific benefits, we can impose scientific access fees to the site.
You see, these different tools, taxes mean that we can gain a certain revenue for the protected area, for it to function and operate.
To conclude, I want an expert to speak to you.
Nicolas Pascal has worked a lot on the study of the values of goods and services of protected areas.
Nicolas works at CRIOBE, the Center for Research on Islands and on the Environment at the University of Perpignan, France.
We can conduct economic assessments of the benefits of protected areas, or of marine protected areas with a variety of aims.
I think to make it simple, it all depends on who wants the study to be done.
When it comes to governments, it may be to value the costs and benefits of a public investment in nature, and therefore to assess exactly the role of this investment in developing the economy of the local community or of the territory or land in general.
For development banks, it's quite a similar aim.
It's a loan or an investment in nature, in a protected area, for example, and it's trying to demonstrate a link between this investment and the economic development of the local communities.
For conservation NGOs, it's a little different.
It's more about identifying who benefits from these protected areas, trying to demonstrate what these stakeholders receive.
And so after maintaining certain values or certain biodiversity ecosystem services, they also impact the economy, so, here we identify who the beneficiaries are.
So there we go, there are always multiple roles and uses.
Let's say that through different stakeholders, these are possible roles and uses.
The tools and methods that are best adapted for the African context...
I think we can distinguish two big cases, or two major situations.
A first situation where we deal with a study, is, we'll say, on a national or regional level.
In this situation, we use an approach that is obviously quite global, where we will try to assess who are the main beneficiaries of the areas.
So here, we're still looking at a preliminary economic analysis.
Another situation, much more precise, is on the level of a protected area.
So here, we have interviews, investigations in the area itself to be more precise about the benefits, and, especially, about their geographical division - about their geographic distribution.
So, are we in the protected area's area of influence?
Do the...
I'll give an example.
Do the tourism service providers, based 60 miles from there, but who use the protected area for their activities, benefit from it?
We have another geographic distribution of these benefits.
So here, there are two levels of methods, which can be put in place.
And that's the first step to determine: the degree of precision that we want, and especially the geographic distribution of the benefits and impacts on the areas.
There we go, it is the end of this video.
You will find more details and more information in the course documents, feel free to have a look at them.
You will now understand that determining the value of goods and services of an area can be a bit complicated, but it is an essential tool to help with decision-making, with managing a site.
Have a good day.
