Hello.
In this sequence we will talk about the options in terms of financing sources for protected areas.
A number of documents and reference guides are available.
I would recommend this one : Guide to Conservation
Finance published by WWF in 2009.
An excellent guide that contains almost all of the options and financing sources that exist.
It only exists in English.
I also invite you to read two texts, again from WWF,
Raising revenues for Protected Areas - a menu of options, published in May 2001 and another guide, more specific on marine conservation:
Financing Marine Conservation, a manual of options from 2004, by Melissa Moye and Boris Spergel.
I also invite you to look up these two websites.
First, the Toolbox developed for the RAMPAO the West African Marine Protected Areas Network, to guide and assist them in setting up sustainable financing mechanisms.
Finally, on the website of the Conservation
Finance Alliance or CFA, you will find a significant amount of information, guidelines, references, and experts' advice.
Feel free to have a look at it.
Before we look at possible sources of funding for Protected Areas, let's first take a look at the deficits.
It is commonly accepted that Protected Areas and their management are suffering from great budgetary deficits, especially in developing countries.
Recent studies have underlined a deficit in funding in developing countries ranging from $1 to
1.7 billion per year regarding management of existing Protected
Areas.
The study showed here: Financial Cost of Meeting
Global biodiversity conservation targets current spending and unmet needs published in Science magazine, underlines that current expenditures are no higher than $0.5 billion per year.
And that the additional needs, only for the management of current Protected
Areas, would be of $1.09 billion per year.
Finally, that additional needs, would there be an extension of the Protected Areas network, as advised by the Aichi targets would amount to an extra $1.69 billion.
Stuart Butchard from Birdlife International pointed out, at the World Parks Congress, that current spendings have to be at least doubled to guarantee the efficient management of existing
Protected Areas in developing countries, and increase by a factor of 6 to ensure efficient management on a bigger network.
The goal is thus to find additional funding sources for Protected Areas.
Together let's look at the different options.
First, budgetary contributions from the State and governments.
Then, we will look at individual donors' contribution, often in the form of projects.
Finally, private resources, which we can call auto-financing of Protected Areas.
Public Funding allocated to Protected areas is an essential part of their budget.
On average, this public funding amounts to around 60% of the funds made available for Protected
Areas.
It's an average, it is certainly less than that in developing countries.
But that means it's important to reach out to government bodies, especially the department of Finance, to explain, present, and negociate budgets.
For further information on this topic, I invite you to refer to this guide which should come out soon, and is based on the experience of 3 Latin American countries : Chile, Guatemala and Peru.
A popular option is calling to individual donors in the form of projects.
You all know the project management cycle.
Who are these individual donors?
The main ones are bilateral donors: foreign cooperations, German, French, through the KFW, the AFD, multilateral cooperations like the GEF (Global Environment Facility).
GEF 6 is on its way and should propose significant grants to Protected
Areas.
There are also international NGOs.
In Africa WWF, IUCN, Conservation International,
Nature Conservancy
MacArthur, Wildlife Conservation Society, all these international organizations are present in Africa and can offer contributions.
There are also private foundations, sometimes significant in some countries.
Other than substantial projects, you should know that you can call on small subsidies.
Again, there are many types of organizations that make available those small grants for Protected Areas
In terms of private and direct resources available for Protected Areas, you can see here a list of often used options.
These profits can either go directly to the
Protected Area, or transit through authorities at the Ministry of Finances.
Note that it is sometimes difficult to gain back a significant percentage.
Among the options, you can also see fishing or hunting permits, permits or commercial fees regarding resource consumption, for example tourism, fishing, diving.
Commercial permits for touristic installations and camps.
You could also earn royalties on networks or underground or submarines cables.
Used more often, entrance fees to Protected
Areas.
In the Galapagos, the entrance fee is $125 per person,
90% of which goes directly to the Protected
Area.
In terms of entrance fees, look at the numbers of the Quirimbas Park in Mozambique and that of Cocos island in Costa Rica.
You will notice that Quirimbas applies fees to research programs and science programs.
On the other hand, the Park of the Cocos islands applies fees to video or movie shootings.
There again, innovative initiatives.
There is also the sales of local products, guides, goods, etc.
The Protected Area will also be able to impose a tax on film shooting or events, here, a wedding ceremony.
The jackpot being, potentially, the shooting of a TV show, which could bring in a lot of money.
Allow me to underline as well the potential income that would come from illegal activities involving degradations in the Protected Area.
Of course, they are to be outlawed and every measure must be taken to cut down these activities.
Nevertheless, when they are happening, it is important to ensure that the income of these deteriorations and fines go to the
Protected Area.
For example, illegal hunting or fishing fines or measures of compensation for degradation: an extractive industry, farm pollution, etc.
We will look at this soon enough in sequence
You might have noticed that there is more and more talk around income that could be taken from products and services relative to the
Protected Area.
The expression "Payment for ecosystemic services" is then used.
Services like water, carbon, nursery grounds of commercial species or coastal protection.
Take the example of water that the Protected
Area can provide.
Protecting a watershed that provides water to a population downstream can mean income, as the Protected Area receives a financial allocation to protect its water resources.
Using the example of carbon: the Protected
Area, with its forest cover but also its mangroves, sea grass beds or mudflats, contributes to capturing and sequestration of carbon.
There again, the Protected Area could be compensated for its efforts invested in the protection of those ecosystems.
We can also consider the service provided by a Protected Area in the growth of the commercial stock of fish as a kind of assistance on the Protected Area's behalf to the fishing industry of the country.
Therefore, the protected area could also have a share of the fishing income or be included in the fishing agreement signed between powerful industries and the country in question.
Note that, in order to perceive this fee, it is generally considered that a very precise ecosystemic service one that would permanently supply a set amount of quality and quantity, would be connected to at least one seller, one buyer, within a well-framed transaction.
For example, in the context of the carbon market.
It can either be intentional, or legal, but it must always be verified, to insure that the service is well provided, as agreed.
This sequence is over, it is strongly connected the sequence 6.4 that follows and I invite you to study these two sequences together.
Thank you and have a nice day !
