In this sequence, we will address the different mechanisms that can be put in place to collect the funds for protected areas. note that I include here a special focus on conservation trust funds, which are mechanism and funding sources that can enable innovative and additional funding to be collected to contribute to the financial sustainability of protected areas in the medium and long term.
Funding of protected areas can be obtained through different channels.
Here are three in particular: projects by various donors; budgetary support from the government; and finally, trust funds for conservation.
Note as well the first point which is: setting up a bank account.
Setting up a bank account could be very beneficial to a park, for example it helps to collect donations from visitors, friends of the park.
However, it is clear that setting up a bank account is not always easy.
Let's first of all have a look at the project mechanisms.
Projects by donor agencies are frequently a main source of fundings for protected areas in Africa.
Here's the example of Masoala National Park in Madagascar over the 2009 to 2012 period.
Notice the successive projects from different funding partners:
Zurich Zoo, here; WCS; a project by KFW; a project by CI; a project by the region Nord-Pas de Calais, etc.
Note that the project funding are not always transferred into the protected area bank accounts.
We can then have various separate accounting systems and it is sometimes hard to consolidate everything, as it was done here.
Notice as well that each funding partner may have its own conditions and prerequisites.
Submitting a project, to, for example, the
GEF— and the GEF-6 is on its way— requires a certain level of skill, writing skills and project implementation skills.
In terms of fundraising from donor agencies,
I invite you to have a look at this little guide:
Institutional Fundraising for Conservation
Projects by Maaike Manten and Caroline Pridham for
BirdLife International.
This little guide offers a variety of options, filled with experience, case studies that can guide you as you prepare projects intended for institutional sponsors.
Please don't hesitate to refer to it.
Budgetary support: we have mentioned it, governmental and state support can be significant.
Support from governments represents more than
60% of funding for protected areas.
Also note that a protected area is a public good.
It is therefore the state's responsibility to ensure it continues to function.
Government funding can come from several places: of course, from annual public expenditure, decreed by the government; also from revenue from fines and taxes; from mechanisms of converting debts with foreign powers; from payments for ecosystem services; but also from exploitation agreements, for example compensation from the fishing agreements; from income from the extractive industries; and also from budgetary and institutional support from external funding agencies.
It is important that protected areas managers are fully involved in negotiations to find agreements for these different options.
It is, of course, the manager's role to convince and to emphasize the importance of the values of these goods and services of the protected area, just as we saw in sequence 6.2.
Also, notice that once the compensation and the funds have been allocated to the government, it will then be necessary to ensure the revenue is received by the protected area.
Sometimes, that isn't easy.
Let's now have a look at conservation trust funds.
Before going any further,
I would just like to highlight two reference books.
On one hand, Rapid Review of Conservation
Trust Funds, in English here, and in French here, published in 2008.
On the other hand, there is
Practice Standards for Conservation Trust
Funds.
All of a group of colleague's experience, expertise has been put in this book, in this guide to introduce the best practices in terms of running, operating and creating conservation trust funds.
These are very precious guides.
What is a conservation trust fund?
The accepted definition, the one suggested in the 2008 Rapid Review and reused in publications by CFA, is the following:
Conservation Trust Funds are private, legally independent institutions, that provide sustainable financing for biodiversity conservation and often finance part of the long-term management costs of a country‘s protected area (PA) system, as well as conservation and sustainable development initiatives separate from protected areas.
The core focus of conservation trust funds is to raise funds from various sources and to transfer the revenue or the funds in the form of donations to multiple programs and field projects.
Therefore, conservation trust funds are above all a financial institution that raises additional, innovative funds to benefit conservation actions through grants to protected areas, to conservation partners.
It is a legally independant organization, we have mentioned that, which is governed by a joint board of directors, generally with representatives of donor agencies, government, civil society, but also with qualified individuals, mainly in terms of finance, investment, regarding conservation and fund raising.
Finally, it's a mechanism that can manage several accounts for different objectives.
They are generally endowment funds, where income funds the subsidies.
But there can also be a sinking find or revolving funds.
We will have a look at that in a moment.
Let's have a look at the map of conservation trust funds.
Today, there are about 80 conservation trust funds in the world, but this number is increasing, since there is greater interest in trust funds from donor agencies and protected areas themselves.
The collected capital is estimated to be around
800 million, possibly more.
Notice that the distribution is mainly in the Latin and Central American region, but trust funds in Africa are developing and more and more of those institutions are being established in African countries.
Let's have a look at the situation in Africa.
In Africa, there are around 20 of these institutions today.
Most of them were established at the end of the 1990s, mainly in east Africa, and set up to serve to one or several protected areas.
There was a second wave of funds created after
So one can consider that they are still at the initial stage of functioning and capitalizing, essentially in the centre and in the west.
The average capitalization is still low, around 10 million.
But it is increasing, and more and more sponsors and partners are interested in this tool and they are feeling ready to invest in trust funds.
Therefore, financial support mainly comes from GEF or bilateral donors, like KFW, AFD, who have clear support policies regarding trust funds.
International NGOs and private foundations also contribute.
Trust funds are financial institutions, just as their name indicates.
They therefore should have attractive financial returns.
And yet, financial returns these last years have been similar to the benchmark indexes: more than 9% in 2013, which is interesting.
Over a period of 3 to 5 years, there is a return close to 7%, which is similar to what many funds aim for.
More and more, donor agencies consider conservation trust funds to be promising tools.
They have developed general policies in favour of trust funds.
It has been recognized that these institutions are able to generate a significant income over the long term.
So, they can contribute to the financial sustainability of protected areas.
Nevertheless, take note that there are still issues regarding the effectiveness of these institutions.
First of all, in terms of the impact on biodiversity, but also in terms of the quality of the governance and the level of financial return when financial markets are volatile.
So there are still many issues, but there is a lot of good interest for this mechanism that aims to complement other mechanisms that we have studied, namely projects and budgetary funding by the government.
To finish off, I have asked my colleague,
Doctor Fanny N'golo, Executive Director for the Foundation for the Parks and Reserves of Ivory Coast, to give us his opinion, his opinion as trust funds practioner, and to tell us about the Ivory Coast foundation's experience.
Let's listen to him.
To what extent do the Ivory Coast trust funds financially contribute to the functioning of protected areas in the country?
The Foundation for the Parks and Reserves of Ivory Coast is a trust fund created in 2004, and at this point, the foundation finances four national parks in Ivory Coast, which represents more than 80% of the total area of the network of protected areas in Ivory Coast.
For 2015 fiscal year, the foundation has brought in nearly three million euros for the Ivorian Office for Parks to manage these four parks.
Our aim in the medium term, is therefore to, of course, manage to maintain this level of funding, i.e. three million euros per year.
Mr. N'golo, in your opinion, what are the biggest challenges that conservation trust funds face in Africa?
With regards to conservation trust funds in
Africa, there are two major challenges.
The first challenge is being able to sustain this financial mechanism that is this trust fund.
And the second challenge is raising funds.
Indeed, most of the financial resources in trust funds come from donations, and unfortunately, the tradition of giving has not caught on that much in Africa.
For this reason, there needs to be a good strategy for fund raising.
That is still a major challenge.
In your opinion, what are the foundation's biggest successes?
Regarding the Cote d’Ivoire foundation, there are three big successes.
The first is the members that make up the board of directors.
Indeed, the board of directors is composed of competent and committed people.
The second big challenge was being able to gather, during a slightly turbulent period in Ivory
Coast, nearly 31 million euros, and that is therefore a key element.
And finally, we think that the Ivory Coast foundation is an institution well positioned at the national level, because it is a respected institution, that people listen to, and that also has an opinion about all of the conservation problems in the national parks in Ivory Coast.
Can you give us the three factors that lead to the success of conservation trust funds?
In Africa, for trust funds to succeed,
I think there are three factors that play a role.
The first factor involves the management team.
There needs to be a good team, at the level of the board of directors, as well as at the level of the executive management.
The second important element is to apply a good governance when managing the foundation.
Daily managing must, of course, be based on good governance.
And finally, the third important factor is to have a good return on investments, of course.
All in all, the aim is ultimately to be able to gather enough funds for the conservation of the park, or more generally, for conservation.
There, this sequence is now finished.
You should now understand that financial sustainability of a protected area relies on interactions between several mechanisms.
The sources of finance must be varied, the financial mechanisms must be varied, and there must be a whole range, short term, small grants, medium term, long term, to be able to really target financial sustainability for the protected area.
I suggest you visit whenever you want the
CFA website, the Conservation Finance Alliance website; the link is here.
It is bursting with information, case studies and facts, in particular on conservation trust funds.
Thank you and have a good day.
