Hello.
For the end of this module on funding conservation,
I would like to shed some light, on one hand, on the mechanisms of compensation & offset, and on the other, on the most innovative and modern approaches: initiatives from a private investor perspective.
First of all, let's see the mechanisms of compensation.
Several guides and documents are available and I invite you to have a look at them in your course file.
Most of them are in English, in particular the handbook from the BBOP organization, which is a benchmark organization in this field.
There is, for example, this document that is in front of you, that lays out the steps on how to set up a compensation project.
There is also the guide for South Africa.
And there are two studies that are in French: one on the economy and biodiversity mission, and the other by the Commissioner-General for Sustainable Development.
To address this topic, I have asked Ray Victurine to talk to you; he is the director of Conservation Financedivision in an NGO called WCS: the Wildlife Conservation Society.
Let's hear from him now.
What is compensation?
Compensation is the last step in a mitigation hierarchy avoid, minimise and then compensate the impacts on biodiversity.
It is essential that this sequence be respected, first of all, by avoiding, then reducing, and then if necessary, compensating.
It is necessary to compensate for the residual impacts.
Usually, it is not possible to have large development projects without residual impacts.
Usually, it is necessary to actually compensate.
Businesses must finance the compensation and ensure that the results have a lasting effect.
The elaboration of policies and mechanisms to sustainably manage funds from compensation mechanisms need to be and are a priority.
The terms must be established to ensure existing or new protected areas are financed in the long term.
The conservation trust funds offer, for example, a financial medium for efficient and transparent management of these compensatory funds in the long term.
What can compensation do?
First of all, it can improve the management of protected areas.
There are many examples such as restoring, rehabilitating a zone, reintroducing species that used to be there, to put a halt to the current deterioration, and recreate or build a lost habitat.
Secondly, by reducing or stopping the current loss.
We could offer protection, or link together or strengthen the priority zones, reduce or eliminate the current threats to conservation.
For example, we could introduce appropriate substitutes for the targeted biodiversity, look for ways for alternative resources, or compensate users for not using or harvesting biodiversity.
Thirdly, we can pay the private land owners or communities for managing the grounds, for preserving biodiversity.
How do they benefit to protected areas?
Compensation mechanisms have been used as a conservation tool since the 1970s.
In the United States, from the year 1977, the adoption of laws at a national level have been the main motivation for using this mechanism in wetlands.
Several countries are looking into "no-net-loss" policies.
If we consider the regulated market and the voluntary market, the annual total has gone from between $1.8 billion and $2.9 billion to between $2.4 and $4 billion between 2009 and 2010.
It is estimated that the funds made available by these compensation mechanisms could generate annually $5 to 10 billion from now until 2020.
To summarize, an increasing use of compensation mechanisms is explained by four main reasons.
One: more and more financial institutions
- banks, investors, funding agencies, etc. demand compensation for residual impacts as a prerequisite to access funds - loans or contributions.
More and more governments are enacting compensation policies and laws, because the governments demand that all of the businesses compensate for residual impacts.
Businesses are becoming more and more involved in compensation projects on a voluntary basis, to have a good image, to be well-positioned in the market, for the risk, etc.
Finally NGOs and civil society organizations are increasingly placing pressure on the companies to encourage them and to support them into compensating.
As a result, there is significant potential for the funds from the private sector to increase and fund conservation and the protected areas.
Another potential source of finance for protected areas is the private investment sector.
I suggest that you refer to this essay named:
Conservation Finance
Moving Beyond Donor Funding Toward an Investor-Driven
Approach.
This essay is surely a turning point in conservation finance.
Indeed, it is written from the financial investor's perspective, for whom investing in the protected area can be good for business, as well as an ethical and responsible move.
Let's have a quick look at the main characteristics.
This document highlights the perspective of an investment of $200 or $300 billion per year for the conservation of important ecosystems around the world.
It also highlights that the main constraint would be the lack of investable projects.
These are projects with a clear outline of the risk versus return tradeoff and of the benefits to conservation, which can be specified, measured and quantified.
Notice a significant appetite from investors for this type of investment product and their interest for impact investing in conservation and protected areas.
This will require effort, new roles, maybe new tools to collect the investments, and finding common ground between the investors and the protected area managers.
This is a field that will grow further, that's for sure.
To finish off, here is a short video, that documents an interesting initiative in Madagascar: the Tahiry Honko project, a community mangrove carbon project.
It is by the NGO Blue Ventures and filmed, documented and produced by Chris Scarffe.
It is also an interesting and innovative project.
Let's watch it together.
You will have noticed there is room for innovation in terms of financing conservation and protected areas.
I am sure you know of initiatives in this field near you
Let us know about them.
It is important to document and share our experiences and these new initiatives.
The objective is to increase the level of finance for protected areas for these sites to be managed in the long term.
Thank you, and have a good day.
