Throughout this module, we have tackled topics linked to funding protected areas and conservation in general.
We have seen that it is essential to have a good financial plan.
It involves identifying and appreciating the financial needs of the protected area in the medium term, and predictable incomes, the prerequisites of the country and of the protected area to implement certain mechanisms, and the conditions that could determine whether one tool or another is used.
So, it involves consolidating everything into one business plan.
The functionalities that the protected area generates are important for the interested parties: for communities, for the State, and even for the whole of humanity.
An economic assessment involves bringing to light and reestimating quantitatively the goods and services the protected area provides or could provide.
These studies enable investment into protected areas to be justified and compared with the costs and benefits of conservation.
We have tackled the breakdown of the total economic value, the process and the methods to carry out these evaluations, and we have highlighted the precautions and the limits of these studies, all while insisting on their usefulness for managing them.
To make up for protected areas' substantial financial deficits, we found different funding sources and options for protected areas, mainly in the form of state subsidies, contributions from donors, and various internal revenues, or self-financing from protected areas.
Amongst the finance mecanisms that we have discussed, we have mainly highlighted the project mecanisms by donors, budgetary support from the state, and trust funds for conservation.
All of this while still insisting on the necessity of diversifying where the finance is sourced from, and while still insisting on associating several different mecanisms to contribute to the financial sustainability of the protected area.
Finally, we discussed a new option, which, on one side, involves compensation mecanisms, and on the other hand, involves potential promising contributions by financial investors.
We highlighted the potential of these approaches in the future to finance the protected areas and for conservation.
That's it; let's now tackle the test for this module.
