- Okay, welcome back! I'm Chris.
- And I'm Mark!
We're going to answer some of your questions that you've been tweeting and sending, and posting on the fora.
We've made a big list of all the questions that we've received and we're going to get through as many as we possibly can in the next few minutes.
Okay, so let's start with first one which was post when we did Panel 3 on Funding,
The first question by Philippe in Paris.
Hi Philippe!
Your question was: 
Crowdfunding platforms are numerous.
How should we choose between them for our projects?
Which criteria should be taken into account?
Okay, so crowdfunding platform choice is important and we did discuss this in one of the sessions on <i>Crowdfunding</i> or actually in a couple of different sessions we touched on this issue.
But basically the quick answer here is you need to take into consideration the kind of crowdfunding it is, the kind of thing you're looking for.
Are you looking for gifts?
Are you looking for pre-selling inventory?
Are you looking for donations?
Loans? Low-interest rate allowance, etc. and then you got to decide on the kind of platform, the kind of-- is it all or nothing funding?
Or if it's <i>Take what you can get</i> funding?
And you also have geographical and mission focus.
There could be a geographical area where it's certain, one, is you're really getting people in that area, and then there's the mission focus which is about the specific topic.
So all those things are all factors you must take into consideration when choosing your platform.
I would even suggest you surf a bit on the net and try to look at multiple platforms.
Definitely
By doing so, you actually have a pretty good idea of which type of platform will suit you needs best.
It's like which type of platforms, or which type of movies that you see there, clips that you see there, are actually appealing you and would most fit to your own venture.
- Yeah. Have a look at them.
- Have a look at them.
- They have their different personalities.
-Exactly.
Okay. What expenses in manpower does a good crowdfunding campaign require?
How many people should we recruit for the process and which skillset should they ideally have?
That's all from Philippe in Paris.
Quite interesting crowdfunding.
The crowdfunding clip should be appealing and it should transport the passion.
And we have seen research that shows that actually the passion that you get across on the camera is something very vital to getting other people interested in your idea.
So if you think about this idea that I just outlined, how many people would you need?
It's should be you behind the camera, like we're sitting here.
- Cheap operation (laughs).
- Cheap operation.
It doesn't have to be like a big Hollywood production.
Quite the contrary, that might offend some people because they say, "okay, we want..." if you see an authentic person out there shooting this clip, and then being conservative with the money, that sends a signal too.
And also you don't want to spend--
The people on the crowdfunding platform, we are interested in your product and your company don't want to spend their own money for you being in a luxurious Hollywood studio.
They want to see that you're getting something out of the money.
It's not so much about recruiting other people.
Right. I don't think you need to recruit anybody for that--
- Exactly.
- For that particular aspect of it.
Ask your friends to stand behind the camera and do that.
What skills should they ideally have?
The sales skills.
Try to be authentic on the camera.
Try to have a nice storyline in your crowdfunding clip to excite people, and maybe practice a couple of variations with your friends and see how they would react.
- Nice.
- That was for Philippe.
And now we're going to Guatemala just to the other side of the world.
Why do some ventures that we can see at Crowdfunding pages such as Kickstarter look like a very bad idea but still get what they ask for?
That is an interesting one.
Christian asked that.
- Christian from Guatemala.
- Yeah.
You know that's really interesting (laughs)
- Why do they get money?
Why do they get money?
It's a bad idea (laughs)
Well, I think it's a good idea to me if they got money for itself.
They've convinced other people to actually dig deep into their pockets and give them some money.
So it maybe that they are very good in execution, they could be that they have very good passion
There lots of factors why people give.
It could be that they think the person got a very good business sense, and would be responsible with the money and can change later on if something else happens that these ideas terrible.
But in general I don't know--
A bad idea is a subjective thing.
Being able to make money from it, not everyone is going to agree.
I think that's part of what they're excitement about entrepreneurship.
You know some ideas could be appealing to a niche
And you just don't understand why that niche ever finds this product interesting but they love this product
- Right.
- It's a small niche and these people say 
"Finally, something's solves my needs".
- Right.
- That's all.
- You think about a rare disease--
- The cure. (laughs)
You know cure for rare disease I mean, most people say
"look that's your relevant, that's stupid".
- But people with the rare disease--
- They care a lot.
They like it. Yeah. (laughs)
Okay.
Next is another Philippe.
This one is from Bordeaux France.
Could it be possible to reward early "Crowdfunders" by giving them pre-stock-options, which they could exercise?
And then someone else wrote the same,
Is there any source of financing mixing crowdfunding with angel financing to approach people not with gifts but with equity?
Will it be of any interest if it doesn't exist yet?
I think here we discuss these a lot in Week 4.
And you know it depends on the country, the platform etc.
There's a lot of trickiness here about giving away equity in your crowdfunding campaign.
But it is possible in many countries right now, and it's getting more and more possible over time.
So yes it is possible to do crowdfunding camapaigns but it's not in every single country.
Watch that little segment again in Week 4 and look up the rules in your geographic locations.
I just could to that its-- if you give up equity that's quite an expensive way of funding. (laughs)
So there might be other ways lets say you give them product at a discount way actually make sale.
So think about equity as one form you can play with.
But they're others, take others into consideration and carefully list that pros and cons before you go the equity route.
Yes.
Then we have a question in French.
So I prefer to speak in French now.
From Romer of France.
(In French) <i>If we want to launch a product in a market,</i>
<i>how do we know if our idea is compelling</i>
<i>without doing an expensive market study?</i>
So the translation that is
If we want to launch a product in a new market, how do we know if our idea is compelling without doing an expensive market study?
That it is my question.
- Yeah.
In French and in English (laughs)
- Exactly.
How could we know that?
The point is you want to get a good idea about the target market you want to serve,
What does the target market that you want to serve find appealing?
With a lot of reflection and desk research you can also figured out which type of target market could be the target market you want to address.
But it's ultimately you need to talk with these people.
- Right.
- It doesn't have to cost a lot.
I agree.
But you have to make sure that you talk to the people in your target market and then get their feedback because their feedback is vital and then you're reflection meets-- actually the experience from the market and that typically or most often makes you think about how to improve your product maybe re-positioning your product to another target market.
It doesn't have to cost a lot.
You don't have to have like a big company interviewing 500 people,
5,000 people for you that's not the idea.
It can be a few people but think smartly about the questions you want to ask them, what you want to get out of these interviews and what do you want to learn.
So that you improve the match of your product to the market.
- Get out there and talk to people.
- Exactly.
It's not gonna be that expensive to do that.
Follow them around, see how they uses things like that.
Exactly.
Okay, let me ask another question from Stephan Karlovac.
Which is how big do you think an impact on crowdfunding on small businesses in Switzerland is?
Do you know some successful business stories?
Okay, so that's a very detailed question which I think refer as...look (laughs)
We're usually prepared here for this.
Like we looked at these questions for the first time.
But in any case, we did look up a little bit.
As you know from Week 4, crowdfunding is a really growing rapidly.
It's 10 Billion Dollars in money was given to crowdfunding platforms last year.
There are three relatively big ones and three smaller platforms in Switzerland right now, which even that number is going up.
The number that the amount is raising within Switzerland is tricky to know because people outside Switzerland then go donate into platforms inside Switzerland and people inside Switzerland donate platforms outside Switzerland.
So it's a tricky question to know the exact volume in Switzerland.
By I did look up a couple success stories including one called "Suit Art" which raised on a platform, a big platform in Switzerland called "See Crowd".
They raised the 500,050 Francs which is roughly 600,000 Dollars or so.
And that enable them to operate a franchise system and expand to eight cities in Switzerland.
So they had a individual model and then they crowdfunded to do an expansion and they got money and then they did they're expansion.
So it's a tailor. it's a--
- Like suit.
- Making suits.
Yeah. Suite Art.
So there you go, there's an example of at least one small company.
I had a feeling that's not the only one that was just very quick searching around for things like that.
Okay, so we have a couple of questions all related to the panel 4 that we did out of fund raising and one question from Jay.
- Sounds American or UK.
- Jay.
- it doesn't say where he's from.
- Where ever you are from.
Here's your question.
How to raise finds for Non Tech Startup?
Well it's a-- the question is more is it a growth story that you'll looking at here?
You know it could be a growth story, it could be Non Tech.
Often times the growth stories are Tech.
But the growth story could be non Tech.
If it's growth story that is appealing and we talked about venture capital and business angel in the MOOC,
This could be your target audience in the fund raising.
If you have a growth.
If you don't have a growth story then the story is different.
Because then what would you do with if you don't have a growth story?
People would not want to invest for equity because the equity shares are not increasing
- Anyway you might do crowdfunding.
- Anyway, you might like it.
Crowdfunding.
You've got friends and family.
Yeah.
Maybe if you have some valuable stuff at home.
Maybe even your house that you put mortgage you can get bank loans, and all sorts.
Its the typical, debt financing.
Speaking of Debt Financing we had a couple questions on that one from Glen in Lausanne, and then one from Lucas in Los Angeles.
What options exist for debt financing?
And what chances there are the bank lending a startup money?
Okay, you're right in a sense that banks in the MOOC in Week 4 we talked a lot banks and debt financing.
However, much less used, it is possible for firms to issue debt, to issue their own bonds.
That would be another option but I would say for startup company in general, debt financing is going to be relatively difficult.
Especially non-collateralized debt financing.
While a big corporation can issue a bond, small companies are going to have a very difficult time to do that and going to a bank is really the only option and then the question will banks lend to startups?
And the answer is very limited.
You have a checking maybe or you can--
High interest rate, highly collateralized.
Some startup use multiple credit cards that they pushed to the max.
Then you get huge interests on that. but still it's not the typical way.
Those are debts, those are all debt financing.
-Exactly.
- So those are examples.
But it's not super common
I would say in that point of view.
Almira from San Francisco.
What to do if the management team doesn't have a lot experience?
Yeah, how tricky.
Very good question.
You definitely want to expand your management team, you know over time, and you do want search for complimentary skills.
However, I think you also have to be very careful with making sure that you have a kind of a personality match and kind of a vision match so that you can work together carefully and maybe even be more important than the skills.
The skills, I mean, somebody might be able to learn complementary skills or maybe branch out a little bit from where they are, but it's really hard if you have an ethical problem with somebody.
Like you're not sure if the person is a crook or not to have them learn to be a good person is probably less likely.
- Yes.
- So I would say --
So that's why I would say that in general, you want to--
- Make sure that you get along.
- Make sure you get along.
And you have kind of advisers--
In many countries, there will be consultants.
For instance in Switzerland, the State, the government has funds that pay for consultants for start-ups.
They help to fill-in the gaps in knowledge.
I think be honest with--
I like your question because it means you are:
"I'm honest with my skills.
I'm honest with my lacking skills."
Because most entrepreneurs often fool themselves and trick themselves for saying,
"Well, we have all the skills," and then after time, they realize they lack the skills.
Then it's too late because they made errors on the course of venture creation.
In short, be honest to yourself, try to understand which skills you lack, which skills are lacking in your team, and if you want to raise funds for a venture capitalist, be honest too because they will find out that these skills are lacking from your team.
Sometimes investors will also suggest people they can trust.
Exactly. Some have an HR function in the venture caps, some of the venture capitalists
And they will help you fill in the slots because they know lots of people.
- So where are we?
- For the last one...
Besides a strong business plan and good financials, what are the soft skills required to convince investors?
This one may also be from Almira in San Francisco.
So if you think about the soft skills, it's how the team works together.
It's one important soft skill.
Like when there are critical questions for instance, an investor pitch.
How does the team handle those questions.
How does the team react?
Do they react as a team or is it like five people, three people who are like one man show, one woman show.
Try to be a team working in a cohesive manner.
The soft skills can also be sensitive to customer feedback, sensitive towards the feedback you see from all kinds of stakeholders.
What other soft skills could be there?
I think some of the main ones it's certainly some leadership skills.
- Right.
If you have employees, it's a matter of motivating them because you have to figure out or realize that these people also take risks by working in startups.
The startup might not be alive in a few years, a few months even.
So they take some risks and be sensitive to their needs too.
- They need some --
- Have people skills.
Presentation skills in general, interacting with people, potential investors, etc.
It's good to have that down.
I think another question from Almira.
You ask lots of questions which is great by the way.
Or maybe from someone else, we don't have a name here.
How important is it to think about budget during the planning phase?
I think it's- of course, I mean, if money is no object, then it's not important to think about budget.
But if you are in any way constrained by money, then you really have to start thinking about this straight away.
- So that means--
- Which is the case with most ventures.
Yeah. I mean you think about the cash position that you're in.
We've talked about this ad nauseam I think in Week 4.
- But you got to decide --
- Go and watch Week 4 again!
You know how long do you have before you run out of cash.
Maybe they wrote the question before they watched the week.
- It could be.
- And that you'll regret that day.
You have to know how long you have before you run out of cash.
I think that's the budgeting aspect.
I mean, it doesn't have to be this detailed thing, you're looking at every single last detail.
But if you can gross up your costs and you can take a look at your cash position, and you can figure out your burn rate, as we discussed, then I think there is where you need to do it.
And I don't think that you need to go down to the level of specific categories and then an accounting software package.
You really need to think about where your gross costs are coming from.
That's where the budgeting comes in.
I think that's pretty important.
Another Philipe.
Okay, this is from Philipe in Bordeaux.
According to your experience or intuition, what could be a key element to scale up a business usually run on a service model, like consulting or coaching? avoiding a slow growth and only by hiring more and more people?
What tools or what approach?
Please feel free to share your insights, especially the none obvious ones.
- Yeah, that's a tall order.
- Only non-obvious ones!
You are setting the bar high in terms of our capability to answer questions here.
I think your question is right to the point because we talked about scalabiity in one of the weeks.
And a human capital driven model means well you have to add new people to be able to grow.
And while if you have a more product-driven model, like you do maybe on the internet, you just add another server and you cater to a million more people.
These are different scales, scalability issues, challenges that we face here.
But for the human capital driven model, it's either you can think about creating-- putting some of your offering to a product offering.
- To a back-end.
You're moving, packaging it somehow differently.
That might be thinking out of the box and you could be the first one in your industry who does this.
- Yeah.
- Which is fine.
There's always pioneers who are needed.
Or you might think about ways to scale up your human capital-driven model by saying we do franchising?
Think about the <i>audience immobilier</i> or the realtor... what that..?
- Yeah, real estate.
- Real estate agencies.
What they do now in order to be able to grow, they say we'll do a franchise model and we are using that model across the country.
And also in that sense, try to think of ways that other people will have to have the hiring problems, management problems, and you are copying in a way your system.
That's another way of growing.
- Any other ideas?
- They also automate.
I mean if you go and look to rent an apartment then you're on a website, and then that's backend.
They're not a person showing you around.
So real estate agencies in fact have migrated a little bit from the real, person-to-person, low-scale businesses, to some combination of high touch person-to-person and low-touch which is like a backend.
So there, you're searching on the backend, and you're trying to narrow down to maybe four of five, and then you contact the person, then the person shows you an apartment.
You may be able to do something like that, a consulting type or a coaching business.
Maybe there's a backend thing that you can do that's automated that reaches more people and then you can come in and give specific pointers with on a person-to-person level.
- That was definitely not an obvious one.
- Okay. That's not an obvious.
I don't think that's obvious at all.
The next two questions come from France.
Two from Abdiram and Antoinne
Yuganne from Boulogne, and the first one was from Paris.
They've asked the same question.
Is it possible to raise money when you don't have any customers?
It's possible to raise money even when there's no customers.
The problem is you are going to be giving up more of your company to get money when you have no customers.
- Exactly.
- High risk situation.
High risk means higher potential reward for the investor.
Put yourself in the investor's shoes. if there's no proof of market, would you invest in that?
There's some investor that will say,
"Well, we are joining the ticket as Business Angels and we're developing the prototype and help you get the customers."
But that comes at a price.
But it's not impossible.
Quite to the contrary, think about ways of maybe even your potential first customers can help you find if they have a high need for that product.
There are lots of examples like that out there.
- Great.
- Jay from San Juan.
What problems are associated with raising too much money?
That's a good problem to have.
That's a very good problem to have.
Well, you have to be diligent with your funds and you should not waste that.
You might be tempted to waste your money if you raised too much money. if you're disciplined, then there's really, almost never a problem with raising too much money.
But if you're throwing lavish parties with the funds--
Then, this will backfire.
--then maybe it's not so great.
So you end up wasting your money and it's not so great.
And if you think about having too much money, this buys you time until your next financing rounds.
So be happy about it because you don't have to think about getting additional finances.
For some, more time, you know, so for a little while.
Farras from Tyrone.
How can we start a startup with profits from the beginning?
Okay that's a nice.
One of the best business is when money just comes into Paypal or the check comes into the mail and you just go about your daily activities to how much money arrived.
I mean, if you don't have an initial cash position it's really hard to start.
Because you're going to have some costs that you're going to invest in to get your first product, or service, or whatever.
It could be that you have a pot of money to start with then spend a little bit of that and you immediately generate some revenues.
It has to be a low capital intensive business.
So you already own a computer and you can use it to program something, and you can make a phone app or something like that that people want to pay for, then yeah, I mean it's doable.
But even then, you're going to spend some amount of money at some time, unless you say it's
'I already own the equipment.
It's fine. I'm not spending anything out of my own pocket right now.'
It's kind of the boot-strapping idea which i think is a good one.
If you can do it, It's always great.
It's just that usually, you require more capital because you have to pay people, you have to pay for services, you have to buy some more equipment, and you have to spend a little bit of money at the beginning so it's harder to just come out straight out of the gate, profitable from the very beginning.
Then you can look it from the customer side.
They will buy your product if you have some kind of advantage, vis-a-vis, the existing product.
And this advantage needs to be generated somehow upfront.
So it's like you have to do some investment.
The question is how much investment do you have to do based on the occuring status.
How far or how long are you already?
So from that perspective it's tricky.
I think it's really--unless you have invested a lot in the past.
You already paid for the equipment.
A software, or something like that.
You're not going to start a car company and be profitable from the Day 1.
A pharmaceutical company, there's just- that was just too capital.
- Exactly. Maybe some human capital.
- Maybe if you're lucky in software.
And service businesses way, you can say, well I do grocery shopping for elderly ladies, and you can do this with your current skill set.
All of you have to do is talk to elderly ladies on the street or while they cross the street.
Right. I guess that's true, you can walk with them, but if you buy a car, you know, then you're okay...(laughing)
Alright, let's move on.
What are the typical elements to keep in mind in order to generate trust in the project?
- That's coming from Geneva.
- Jaime in Geneva.
Sound Spanish or Portuguese.
Trust is a key element in the new venture because you have to do--
Creating a venture is social activity and you are engaging with people who give you funding, all kinds of stakeholders - with your customers, potential customers, with suppliers, people who give you funding, potential employees.
In order for them to trust in your business, they first have to trust you.
So you are for them, the business.
It's a person-based trust.
It's not like company-based trust.
Well, the company is not there.
Face it, you know.
You better make sure that they can trust you, that you have a solid appearance vis-a-vis your stakeholder, and once they trust you, they will trust later on the company when it's there.
You are the face of the company.
You are the company.
And that was an issue that we also discussed in the crowdfunding part.
Which is that if you don't deliver on your promises that you make when you're crowdfunding, for example, you've promised them delivery of a prototype and you don't follow through, then that's bad for the trust out aspect.
- Exactly.
- It would be really hard to win that back.
That can burn the trust in your whole company because that can go viral as well, in forms, etc.
So, make sure that you follow up on your promises in the crowdfunding campaign.
The next question, from Gregory Ayecs from Port-au-Prince.
- Hello to Port-au-Prince.
- In Haiti, wow!
Yes. Is it easier to raise capital investment from angel investors than venture capital firms?
And if yes, why?
Alright, we also talked about this a lot in Week 4.
These are different sources and they have different needs.
Is it easier?
I mean, you're usually not looking for a venture capital investment early, early on.
You might be looking for an angel investor early on.
Early on, yes.
It's easier to raise money from an angel than it is from venture capital.
Venture capitalists, in general are not going to touch an early stage business. a really early seed stage business.
So later on, hard to say.
People might say, "Well, you're capital demand is too high," and so an individual angel might just say,
"Forget it. I don't want to go in on that."
So it might be easier in some sense, later.
It just depends on lot of factors that you just can't compare them.
They're not apples and apples.
Apples and oranges.
Something like that.
Base it on the stage that you're in.
Exactly. I think <i>stage</i> is on one of the keywords here.
Yeah. Okay, here's Marco from Ljubljana, Slovenia who is living in Abuja, Nigeria.
Excellent.
What would be the best advice to entrepreneurs concerning money management?
I think the best advice is that you look at the money in your company like the air that you have to breathe.
It's so vital.
If you run out of money, your run out of air to breathe.
And also cash flow management is of vital importance.
Monitor your cash outflows, and monitor your cash inflows.
Try to also analyze them.
Why does money come from a certain set of customers?
Why do they spend more money on your products and others for instance, why do they do repeat purchases?
So try to understand your money outflows, your money inflows.
Get a good grip on your money management, your cash flow.
- Because it is the air that your breathe.
- Perfect.
Gregory again from Port-au-Prince, another question from you.
Should I raise some more money than I need and why?
That's related to the question we had before.
- Yeah.
I think it's always try to raise a bit more.
First, investors might cut your wishlist, and second, it buys you time until you have to raise funds again.
That buys you time to actually start working and keep on working on your company, and getting your product out, talking to customers, etc.
It depends on your revenues and cost streams.
Your costs are always going to be constant
I mean, they're always going to be there.
Your revenues might be coming in every once in a while.
If there's a slight delay in your revenues, then you might up spending more than you thought you are going to.
I think the general rule of thumb is people want to give money, they want to make investments in businesses that don't need investments.
So I think that's the -- yes.
If you can get more than what you need any moment in time but don't burn it as we said in the prior question.
Then the next one is interesting.
Who would you say is the <i>Marco Polo</i> of our time?
So if you watched the Week 5, last segment, the last two minutes, you know who the Marco Polos of your time are.
- Go watch the end of Week 5.
- It starts at 5:18.
- The very last second.
- Then we give this away.
But give it-- second to those guys.
In every country, you will probably have.
This is the global MOOC
I would say that there is not--
You can always think about the big characters that we have in entrepreneurship
Without telling the names, each of you has names in mind.
Think about Elan Vasco,
Steve Jobs, whatever.
Generally, it's like--
I think entrepreneurship nowadays is a very democratic and pervasive and a much encountered phenomenon across the globe.
So each and every country has its <i>Marco Polo's</i>.
Each and every country has its adventurers who...
Risk any curse.
Risk-takers who embark on their entrepreneurial journey .
Of course these big examples, these well-known examples are inspiring.
But there are lots of entrepreneurs who are doing it on a smaller scale, who are doing something extremely innovative,
They deserve a lot of respect too just because we don't know about them and read about them in the news.
They are fantastic entrepreneurs that run great companies and I think they deserve a lot of admiration too.
So, a long story short, yes, these people exist, the new <i>Marco Polo's</i>, but on the other hand, their entrepreneurship is a much bigger phenomenon.
The secret will be revealed in the last segment of Week 5.
Question 9: Zierch Itoki from Yaoundé, Cameroon.
I have one point to you.
Don't ask these long questions.
This is like eight lines.
Turning idea into value has always been my passion. Great.
I always told myself that it is better to deploy your potential and passion than just to be employed.
We can agree to that.
That wasn't the question.
But in our country, it's very difficult to put together passion and real possibilities.
In my country, young people are very interested about creating tech ventures, but our critical questions are always returned.
Is Africa really ready for Tech ventures?
I think they skipped a line here.
Which types of tech ventures for whom Africa is ready to work on for good profits?
Which type of tech ventures work in Africa, in short?
So you've been...we've been to Africa.
What can I? I'm hesitant to give advice.
To make such prognostications about the entire continent of Africa.
But I have traveled around Africa a bit and I visited different parts.
I was able to observe co-working spaces, and startup hubs, and I see that tech ventures are starting to take off even in Africa.
And yes, you have to take into consideration the fact that not every single person is going to be
"internet connected" all the time.
So the infrastructure maybe is a little bit less than what we will be used to.
But that doesn't mean that there's no possibility.
Some of those are interesting opportunities for people.
And if you want some, as an inspiration, go to this website, <i>My African Startup</i>.
There are a lot of examples on there.
And then Google sums up some startup competitions.
Yeah, I saw a lot of great examples.
Software products, apps, systems for monitoring inventory in factories.
Systems where it would tell people the right time to plant crops based on small chips that will detect the weather conditions and knowing what kind of seeds are supposed to be planted, and then send an SMS,
"okay, now is the time to plant."
So that's a tech startup too.
There's a lot of exciting things going on in Africa.
I agree, you should be passionate about it and I think if you look around you're going to find some things that you'll be able to match up your interests will some latent needs that we don't realize that we have yet.
- So keep on pushing Zierch.
- Yeah keep going Zierch.
What's your favorite example of viral marketing?
Can it be done tastefully?
I know my favorite example of viral marketing.
Tell your favorite example.
My favorite example is <i>MCI Friends and Family</i>.
It's not a recent business, right?
This is the thing on the phone long distance service in the 1980s.
- When he was young.
- Yeah.
I don't know if I was even young back then.
Okay. I was <i>younger</i> in the 1980s.
They'd call you and they would offer a discount if you and your friends and family had worn the plan, the MCI plan.
And so people would give the names of their relatives to the person who's calling on the phone, to the operator and they would take them and they would get discounts.
And that created a list.
That was a very early, early on viral marketing campaign.
So for me, that's a very interesting example.
And actually in our forums, on the Coursera forums there are some very nice examples here.
I think this was a very humorous discussion that the people had on there.
How much time is it okay to spend on building my product?
So that's one of these questions that is of course related to a minimum viable product.
It's like a question, "How big is a fish?"
Yeah (laughter).
There's small ones,
There are big ones.
It depends on the product of course.
Some products, you can do a minimum viable product because your customers actually will be able to give you feedback.
But with other products, especially oftentimes B2B setttings,
<i>business to business</i> settings, your customers don't want to work with a minimum viable product.
They want to have the full proof, the fail-proof version.
So it really depends on your target segments.
There is no one single, good answer.
Of course if you can test your products' attractiveness and get feedback from the customers with a low-key, minumum version, go for that because you're not wasting money.
- Front-end, very nice.
- Exactly.
If you have contacts even in a business B2B setting, you might be able to do a front-end and get feedback.
But I think the more interesting question is how much time did you have for before you run out of cash?
Then that's going to determine a lot.
Try and go as fast as you can.
But remember it's going to cost you.
I think that's part of the-- maybe just underlining this comment a little bit.
What is a good idea?
Is it one that is more profitable, more innovative, more available, or more useable?
- It's like a multiple choice question.
- Right.
- You're testing us.
- They're giving us a quiz now.
I think the best idea is an idea where your customers are willing to pay you.
Presented more than once in the MOOC.
You don't create a business for creating a product.
You create it for creating a customer.
So from that perspective, think about your customers.
Think about what your customers want.
If they are willing to pay for your product, for the functionality in your product, for the benefits of this product.
This actually brings us to the final question.
It says, "You say, 'customers do not buy features, they buy benefits.'
What does this mean?"
Yeah. Basically, what this is referring to is that the customers don't care about the features <i>per se</i>.
All they care about is how they can use it.
Is it valuable for them?
Does it save them money?
Does it save them time?
Does it meet their need?
And so having an extra feature, what we're talking about a little bit before hand, one idea is like a battery.
You're changing a battery on a phone.
That's kind of like a feature.
It's a replaceable battery.
That's great. That's a feature.
But that's not really what the customer wants.
The customer wants a long battery life.
The customer wants the phone to go a very long time.
So maybe that feature helps what the customer wants because they can carry spare batteries or something like that, then thus giving them more time.
But you got to focus on the part that the customer wants, not the part that bells and whistles that you add, unless it solved the problem.
And that's quite important with the marketing campaign.
Because you could say,
"This phone or camera can replaceable-made batteries," and I was like...
What the customer wants-- the customer only understands when you say,
- "With this phone you can --"
- talk for five days!
- That's what he cares about.
- Right.
So that was already all the questions.
Yeah. I think that's basically the questions for this week.
Thanks for watching the MOOC's and for sending in the questions.
Some of them will be handwritten.
We'll send you some handwritten responses.
Exactly. To make this also moving back to the old world.
- So thanks very much.
- Thanks for joining us.
Thanks for joining us.
See you back in MOOC-land.
