Hi, my name is Karen Sudmeier-Rieux.
I'm a senior researcher at the University of Lausanne and a training and education consultant with the United Nations
Environment Programme.
This video will be about the importance of ecosystem-based disasters reduction and adaptation.
We'll then go over a case study related to Nepal and Eco-DRR, or Ecosystem-based
Disaster Risk Reduction.
We'll then look at the science and technology and Eco-DRR linkages, and incorporating local knowledge with Eco-DRR.
And, finally, we'll conclude with main points.
Let me start with an example on the importance of ecosystem-based disasters reduction, with an example from tropical storm Jeanne which hit the island of Hispaniola in 2004.
This island is split between Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
Haiti, unfortunately, lost over
6,000 people during this tropical storm, whereas in the Dominican Republic,
18 people lost their lives.
There were over US$ 7 billion in damages.
This slide shows the border between Haiti on your left, and the Dominican Republic on the right.
This also explains why so many more people lost their lives during the tropical storm Jeanne than in the Dominican Republic, mainly due to debris flow and flooding.
Most of the 18 people who lost their lives in the Dominican Republic are actually living on the border between both countries.
So, as we can see, ecosystem-based approaches are extremely important for reducing disaster risk.
This slide shows Yala National Park, which was hit by the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004.
In the red circle, you see an ecotourism resort which is naturally nestled behind the sand dunes.
During the tsunami, only five centimeters of water entered the ecotourism resort, and there were no casualties.
This slide shows the Yala Safari Resort, where they cut down the sand dunes for better sea views.
Unfortunately, during the tsunami,
27 people lost their lives after a seven-meter high wave hit the resort.
It also really demonstrates the importance of sand dunes as natural buffers against tsunamis.
This slide shows the importance of vegetation as a protection against coastal hazards.
This image is from Senegal, and shows mangroves that are protecting the coast against erosion and sea surges.
This image from southern France demonstrates how wetlands can act as buffers against flooding, as it offers space for excess rainwater.
Here we see how forest can reduce occurrence of mountain hazards.
This is a protection forest in Davos, Switzerland which protects the town from avalanches, rockfall and landslides.
So, we can say that ecosystems are one of the few approaches that address all three components of the risk equation.
Hazards, we just saw several examples how ecosystems can act as natural buffers for reducing or mitigating hazards.
Ecosystems provide many services, such as food and fiber and can reduce the vulnerability of populations before, during and after disasters.
So, ecosystems can reduce exposure by functioning as natural buffers with elements at risk.
This slide shows a forest that was planted on a steep slope in Afghanistan.
So, it acts both to stabilize the slope, but also when you have trees in an area that's very dangerous people do not actually live there, so it reduces their exposure in this way as well.
So, how do we define Eco-DRR?
Eco-DRR is the sustainable management, conservation and restoration of ecosystems to reduce disaster risk with the aim of achieving sustainable and resilient development.
Very similar is the concept of ecosystem-based adaptation, or EbA, which involves the use of biodiversity and ecosystem services through sustainable management, conservation and restoration of ecosystems, to help people adapt to the adverse effects of climate change.
This diagram explains the benefits of various types of approaches to disaster risk reduction.
Eco-DRR and EbA provide disaster prevention and recovery.
In addition, they provide hazard mitigation, climate change adaptation, water, soil, and air purification, livelihoods benefits, biodiversity,
CO2 sequestration, recreation.
As compared to more classical engineering, or grey approaches to hazard mitigation and disaster prevention, which mainly focus on these two goals.
Hybrid approaches combine both, offer maximum protection in many cases.
An example would be combining protection forests with paravalanche barriers.
We also know that Eco-DRR approaches are often more cost-effective and increase in strength over time, such as soil bioengineering which combines small civil engineering structures with deep-rooted plant species.
Now, these may take longer to be established but they require much less maintenance over the long run, as compared to purely civil engineering approaches to hazard mitigation.
We will see a case study in soil bioengineering in Nepal later in this video.
Let me give some examples of Eco-DRR approaches, which include integrated coastal zone management, integrated water resource management, protected area management, integrated fire management and sustainable land management.
These are all natural resource management approaches that have been around for decades, yet which are only recently beginning to incorporate disaster risk reduction.
For example, integrated coastal zone management is mainly about managing coastal resources with multiple stakeholders, and can and should include early warning and evacuation provisions.
And finally, community-based natural resource and risk management, as well as gender issues, are cross-cutting to all of these Eco-DRR approaches.
Now I would like to introduce a case study on Eco-DRR in Nepal, where we look in more detail on soil bioengineering for stabilizing slopes.
I would like to introduce the case study which covers the project:
Ecosystems Protecting Infrastructure and Communities, or EPIC, which is a five-year project in six countries seeking to understand the role of ecosystems in reducing disaster risk.
It is managed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, or IUCN, together with the University of Lausanne, with funding from the government of Germany.
In Nepal, the project's objectives are to enhance local knowledge and national uptake of bioengineering or eco-safe roads; build capacity of local and national actors-- development, environment and DRR actors-- with regards to Eco-DRR and bioengineering; and finally, to mainstream Eco-DRR into local, nation and global policies.
Let's watch this short video clip which explains the context for why we're working on this topic in Nepal.
One of the main priorities of the government of Nepal for the past decade has been the construction of rural roads connecting villages to towns and cities.
Having a road is extremely important for villages; it gives them access to markets, to education, healthcare, especially employment.
However, one of the issues with rural roads is that many of them have been funded and constructed by communities themselves, such as this rural road that you see on the hilltop behind us.
This rural road was constructed about five years ago and unfortunately triggered an old landslide, and is causing a very dangerous situation to the villages below it.
It's also creating a lot of debris flow and has buried several hectares of productive agricultural land, creating economic losses and also high risk to the population.
These types of landslides that are triggered by roads are actually one of the main triggers of shallow landslides, and one of the greatest sources of environmental degradation in Nepal today.
This diagram illustrates in more detail what we saw in the video clip.
We see a new road that has triggered an old landslide.
This landslide is creating debris which is being transported downslope to the bottom of the mountain where a huge deposition zone is now burying agricultural lands.
So, the EPIC project established three demonstration sites in Western Nepal near the Pokhara area, in which one of the villages had highly degraded slopes, partly due to grazing pressure, but especially due to poor water management along a locally constructed road.
The image on the right shows the same site two years later, after we had installed small drainage structures along the road and employed various bioengineering techniques, involving the plantation of various bamboo species to stabilize the gullies.
All this was undertaken in collaboration with the local community which continues to monitor the site, and is now interested in expanding the bioengineering works to other heavily-degraded slopes.
This road is now open during the monsoon and provides fodder grasses for the community livestock.
Another activity has included a so-called rhizotron, where we planted eight different species of grasses with deep roots that were selected by the community as the most appropriate plant species for bioengineering.
We also installed a micro weather station at the three sites, which are being cared for by the local communities.
And, finally, we're quantifying ecosystem services at each site, or the extent to which the vegetation is reducing erosion rates.
We are doing this using state-of-the-art technology called LIDAR which uses laser light to measure distance with high accuracy.
For more information on this case study, see the video clip from my colleague Sanjay Devkota, who was a Nepali civil engineer and specialized in bioengineering.
Basically we are using the grasses species and some other species to stabilize shallow landslide, and also to improve the degraded land slope.
The area here is basically open grazing land area where people used to graze their animals, and when we visited this area two years ago we found it a very nice place to establish a demonstration site.
I tried to reach to the community people and we started talking with the people and asking them to give this area for the demonstration site.
We visited it a couple of times, at that time.
People were not very convinced at the beginning.
We took support from the District Soil
Conservation Office,
IUCN and also UNIL, and after a couple of meetings the people agreed to give a part of this area to establish the bioengineering demonstration site.
This is the area where we implement our resources technique; it's all about soil bioengineering, where we implement the low-cost technique of bioengineering in consultation with the local people.
We also try to apply the simple civil engineering component to stabilize these gullies.
Where we can see the different plants, we applied this broom grass technique it's a live fencing technique, and we also applied some other species that's really very good for protecting the soil slope.
We also established a test plot where we're monitoring the root system of different plant species.
We are looking for a root architect, and the drought-resistance species that may be very good for the bioengineering technique.
Altogether here we planted eight different species, not only in this plot but also in this gully protection and all the roadside slope stabilization works.
I'd like to wrap up this video by commenting on the importance of science and technology at various levels, to better understand how ecosystems can contribute to disaster risk reduction, from state-of-the-art LIDAR technology to using local knowledge in establishing plant test plots.
Finally, it is by combining local knowledge with formal science that we have been able to achieve promising results, which are now being multiplied at the local level and are also being communicated to national policymakers, to affect more sustainable road construction practices in Nepal.
I'd like to wrap up this video with some main points.
The first is that Eco-DRR can offer many additional benefits over traditional disaster managing practices.
Second is that they can often be more cost-effective over the long run.
However, we need to recognize that ecosystems often have some limitations and can be beneficial in combination with more traditional engineering approaches.
And finally, by combining local knowledge with formal science, this can be an effective and empowering approach to disaster risk reduction.
