Hello, welcome to this last chapter of the course of fluid mechanics, which will be dedicated to Bernoulli's principle. We will first start to see Bernoulli's principle and its hypotheses. We will then see three applications relatively simple and direct of this principle : first of all the Torricelli's law that allows us to calculate the draining velocity of a tank, then we will compute the intrusion velocity of a heavy gas in a lighter gas, finally, we will see the Pitot tube that calculates the velocity of a flow. It is a device, among others, that we find in aeronautics. The second part of this chapter will be dedicated to hydraulics with free surface, and we will see how
Bernoulli's principle allows us to calculate a certain number of characteristics of free surface flows in rivers and in channels. First of all, to warm up a little, I begin with a small quiz : let's imagine that we have two plates, a lower plate which is motionless, and an upper plate that is movable. This upper plate has a hole and we will inject air through this hole. The question that raises is the following
: when we injecting air through the hole, what is happening ? Is the plate going to move downwards, it is going to stick itself to the lower plate, or on the contrary the plate is going back up. The second problem, we will see the answer with
Torricelli's law is the following: we have a tank full of water, there are three holes in this tank, at three different levels, and the question is to know, as each the holes creates a jet, which one of these three jets will go the furthest. 
So we start by firstly finding back
Bernoulli's principle from the equation of momentum conservation that we had seen in the last chapter. So we have previously seen that the momentum conservation at the local scale is written in the following way : here in the terms that are on the left, I have the local acceleration, here the convective acceleration. So here we have the terms that we call inertial terms, and so the variation of momentum is equal to the sum of forces applied locally, i.e. the weight, the pressure gradient, and the divergence of the stress field. In the same way it is the case for point mechanics, if I multiply the equation of momentum conservation by the velocity, I will be able to obtain an equation of kinetic energy conservation. So I will multiply here each of the terms by the velocity u. Every time
I will encounter a derivative, I will replace, for example, u∂u par ∂|u|² , so I will be able to introduce in this way the kinetic energy. I have wrote it here but I will essentially be intrested in fluids that are incompressible, so 
ϱ will be here a constant. So when I multiply here all the terms by u, and that
I integrate, I obtain the following equation, and I can thus introduce directly the kinetic energy, which will be equal to
(1/2)ϱ|u|². After a couple of mathematical manipulations,  what we can show is that the variation, here the material derivative of the kinetic energy is equal to the local power of forces, so here the power of gravity forces, the power of pressure forces, and here the power of viscous forces. Then this equation of conservation of the energy can be written in a way slightly different. We will here essentially introduce a certain number of definitions, among others, the dissipation function.
When we were doing point mechanics, what we were showing was that the dissipated energy was a work multiplied by a velocity, so here the dissipated energy, or the dissipated power will be exactly equal to the deformation rate multiplied by a stress, and so we will take the trace of the product of the two tensors. We introduce what we call the gravity potential, so we will be able to subsitute here ϱg under a vector form by the gradient of a gravity field which will be here the letter
Ψ. We also introduce the generalized pressure that is nothing else than the local pressure, plus here this gravity pressure term. So the equation that we have written previously can be written in the following way, where we have here the local derivative of kinetic energy, here a transport term, so a convection term, a quantity equal to k, the kinetic energy, Ψ, the gravity potential, and the pressure. The sum of the two is equal to the dissipated power, and here a term that is a divergence of the work of the external forces if we took a small elementary control volume. So if
I translated what I just said on a graphical form, we must imagine a small elementary volume. We have here a transport of a certain quantity that I call Ψ, which is equal to the kinetic energy, the potential gravity, and the pressure. The temporal variation of the kinetic energy and the term of transport of this sum here, will be equal to the work of the external forces and to the internal dissipation.
This theorem under this form here is not particularly interesting. However, there exists an application which is relatively remarkable as we will obtain a conservation theorem for which there are no differential terms. This domain of application is encountered quite frequently when we will be able to assume that we are working with permanents flows, so the differential with respect to time of the kinetic energy is equal to 0, and that we assume that the viscosity is relatively weak : it will be the case for example of air, which has a very weak viscosity.
At that point here I completely assume that the viscosity is zero, so the stress tensor is equal to 0, and the energy dissipation is equal to 0. In this case here, the equation we have seen previously is written simply as follows : u. ∇(k + Ψ + p) so the kinetic energy, the gravity potential, and the pressure, this scalar product here is equal to 0. This means amongst other things that the geometrical interpretation is that the term k + Ψ + p can be constant along a streamline. I recall what a streamline is : it is a line, and if I take each of the points of this line here, the velocity must be tangential. So along a streamline, we must have conservation of the quantity that thus results of the sum of kinetic energy, gravity potential, and pressure. There, during this first module, we have seen Bernoulli's principle, we have seen that in a case of approximation relatively common, we will be able to assume the flow permanent and the viscosity very weak, so negligible. We can show that there exists a quantity called in my course Ψ that results of the sum of the kinetic energy, the gravity potential, and the pressure, and that this quantity Ψ is conserved along a streamline. So if I take a streamline, from a point to another, its quantity Ψ will have exactly the same value. It is this principle here that we will apply afterwards, and we will see that there are numerous applications.
