Hello and welcome to this MOOC on law enforcement in protected areas.
As you know, protected areas are places that conserve nature.
This conservation meets certain rules.
The goal of this MOOC is to give us the keys to understanding what these rules are and what are the principles regulating their implementation, in theory and in practice.
Of course, a MOOC can’t replace in situ surveillance, or more generally monitoring infringements in the field.
But it can help us think about the context in which this can be applied, about what behaviours to have and about the best practices to develop.
In this MOOC, we will be looking at:
- How the laws, rules, conventions and codes that supervise nature conservation in general and protected areas in particular function.
- Then, we will talk about work ethics required for law enforcement
- We will focus on corruption, a key element of the failure of monitoring systems
- We will describe the methods on how to give clear and organised orders to limit possible mistakes
- Finally, we will see how all this can be translated into field surveillance in a protected area.
You’ll see, the classes include several experts, lawyers, police officers, PA managers, all professionals in their fields.
Each module is made of several sequences in the form of videos divided by quizzes and examples.
Further documentation is also available, which can help you go in further detail according to your needs.
A PDF document is also available for online reading or for downloading to help you remember the most important points.
Finally, if you pass the optional online exams you will receive a certificate.
If you would like to receive the Certificate of Open Studies, you can prepare for the classroom exam of this MOOC.
All this is mentioned on the forum of the
MOOC platform, but also in the Facebook group which I invite you to join.
You can also sign up for the monthly NAPA newsletter.
There, we are available for you so don’t hesitate to get in touch.
Have a great MOOC !
