Hello, and welcome to this first module of our MOOC on Law enforcement.
It will be presented to you by Lydia Slobodian,
Legal officer at the IUCN Environmental Law
Center in Bonn, Germany.
The goal of this module is to help us better understand the laws and regulations that apply to protected areas conservation.
We will look at where they come from, and what their nature, scopes, limits and uses are.
This topic is indeed important so the module will be quite long.
Let’s have a look at the topics we are going to cover.
First, we will see what Law is.
What form it takes.
What it is used for.
Then, we will try to understand its utility and uses for conservation.
We will look at the connection between law and protected area governance, and of course, we will see the importance of good governance.
Then, we will look at the translation of law into applicable regulations for conservation.
The ones that apply to certain geographical territories such as protected areas.
The ones that focus on the species found on these territories.
Finally, we will talk about the regulations that cover the activities that take place there.
We will then change scales to look at international laws, what they are, what they bring, what their importance is, and where they come from.
Then, we’ll quickly cover some international agreements on the environment and see how they work.
Among these, we will talk about the ones that directly concern protected areas like the
CBD, the Ramsar or world heritage conventions, the CITES and the CMS which we already talked about in the MOOC on PA management.
We will quickly cover the principles and rights that go alongside global laws, like the principles of precaution or sovereignty, and more generally human rights.
We will finish with a sequence on the principles of law enforcement, an excellent introduction to the next modules.
Of course, you can go deeper into all these notions by reading the recommended documents.
Do the quizzes between sequences, or join the conversation with other participants on the platform or on our Facebook page, it will certainly help you.
There, have an excellent first module !
