There is plenty of literature on work ethics, especially on security services like the police or the army.
Many authors have developed concepts or principles on how these organisations function.
We will be looking at the governance of a state or semi-public organisation based on the principles exposed by Cohen and Fledberg in this book.
The authors consider 5 principles that must guide the governance of a police organisation, describing them as the 5 moral standards a security organisation must follow.
This can perfectly apply to the sovereign structure of a protected area.
According to the authors, the 5 principles make up a form of social contract between the population and the security organisation:
Fair access to government services.
This means each individual, citizen and litigant must have access to services provided by the dedicated structure.
The response given must be the same for all.
In all cases, the citizen’s approach must be taken into account.
Public trust.
When the population grants specific power to a security organisation, it must have the guarantee, based on laws and regulations, that the organisation will be used in the interest of all and not for the benefit of a few.
Public safety and security.
Protection of goods and people is the goal to achieve.
It is the common asset to preserve.
Abuses that come along trying to reach this goal are just as damageable as the omission to take care of it.
Teamwork – Cooperation with all the partners.
A security organisation is only part of the problem resolution chain.
It cannot act alone and must collaborate with the population in the general sense, namely with the local authorities, the judicial order, political authorities, education officials and so on.
*Objectivity.
Any action of a security organisation’s agent must be driven by the target to meet, without giving way to favouritism, discrimination or negligence.
Now that we’ve established the 5 principles, we can define communication actions that will make the organisation more transparent to the population, that will instil confidence in its interventions and valorise the agents’ actions.
Now let’s see what concrete communication actions can be taken.
Fair access to government services.
For such a principle to be adopted by the entire organisation, rules must be set, and for the population to know these rules, they must be published.
A deontological code tells agents what their rights and obligations are, and what the minimal requirements are that habilitate them to practise their profession.
By having access to this code, the population will have a clear idea of what they can obtain from the relevant institution.
Public trust.
Safety and security.
This is about managing the latitude given to agents when exercising their given power.
Professionally speaking, agents must undergo structured training, especially when it comes to the use of force or coercion.
In the same way, leaders must manage staff transparently and undergo proper training.
Here, the leadership’s responsibility, their way of leading staff and the precision of orders given are a matter of vital importance.
Also, at this point, a discussion must be carried out on the relevance of controlling agents’ personal lives to enable early detection of risks of blunder.
Teamwork - cooperation with partners.
In a park, the organisation in charge of security or surveillance is one of the components from a wide selection of partners involved in conservation.
Ideally, these partners should meet regularly to share problems, find solutions and implement them.
This is the principle used by community policing.
The idea to set up meetings that the security organisation can be led to organise.
This is when we talk about a local safety and security council.
Objectivity.
This is when we tackle the issue work ethics that must be subject to a published code of ethics.
The nomination of an ethical officer supports this element.
Purpose and governance.
The notions considered here are different pieces of a puzzle within a Protected Area, that will show externally that the area is indeed achieving the mission it was given, and internally, to determine what is expected from agents and managers.
To tie it all together, the security organisation, for example the unit in charge of the fight against poaching, could draw up a yearly report to the guardianship authority, which is destined to be published and exposes the actions undertaken in relation with the 5 standards and the results obtained.
