We’ve defined what corruption is.
We also saw that besides corruption, there are other offences or crimes that can be committed by public officials.
Corruption requires the presence of a corruptor and a corrupted while other criminal activities are the responsibility of one person alone.
Notice that the situations leading public officials, managers and staff to fail are often the same: absence of internal control, temptation, a personal financial situation considered unfair, lack of recognition by leadership and/or by the population, frustrations on career evolutions etc.
There are plenty of countermeasures.
At least some of them must be implemented by the organisation.
This is what we will look at in this sequence.
First, each member of the organisation must be clear on the general mission of the organisation he serves and that pays him, as well was on his own mission within this structure.
It is everyone’s responsibility to understand these missions, regardless of the level of leadership.
Senior executives as well as staff must know the factors impacting the organisation’s operations, as clarity and transparency are the enemies of corruption.
Each element of an organisation has a clearly defined area of work.
Literature in this field identifies many types of factors that impact organisations.
In this sequence, we’ll introduce one of these lists of factors, namely the PESTEL analysis, which includes six main factors.
P for Politics.
Whether it’s the country or the organisation’s politics, this is the main factor impacting an organisation in its operations and in setting the goals to achieve.
Politics determine the nature of the organisation’s mission.
E for Economy.
The economic and financial situation obviously influence the operations of the organisation, namely the means at hand to fulfil its mission.
S for Social.
The social situation of civil society, its customs, its culture and morals, limit some aspects of the organisation’s operations, but sometimes it can broaden them.
T for Technology.
The technology at hand can modify the organisation’s operations and methods, by distributing the logistics at hand more or less evenly.
E for Environment.
The weather, the field layout, urban development, or on the contrary a very rural context or an isolated location, all require special adaptation from the organisation.
L for Legal.
By definition, the law is binding in many fields, but it also leaves room for freedom in other fields.
This flexibility is part of the mission analysis and the goals to achieve.
The PESTEL analysis is only one of the possible approaches.
But it illustrates quite well the different constraints that an organisation and its members may face.
Top leadership must also get its decisions across to all the associates.
To do so it must explain the factors that influences their decisions in a way or another.
Communication must hence be a key element in the fight against corruption.
Staff must on the other hand must have a clearly defined scope of action within their own field of activity.
In this case, PESTEL may not be the most suitable solution as its factors aren’t perceptible enough or adapted to daily activities.
Instead, the organisation can focus on having good work ethics and on making sure clear and non-ambiguous orders are given by leadership.
These two elements limit the scope of action of each person within the organisation.
We talk about this briefly in the next sequence and see what it looks like practically.
