We saw that corruption must be handled by the organisation itself.
It’s the organisation’s responsibility, through management, to implement controlling measures, namely by adopting rules and norms, by giving clear orders and by implementing the required ethical principles and deontology.
Now we are going to try and see the difference between what will contribute to effectively fight against corruption, and the other types of offences in an organisation.
First, all levels of responsibility must be clearly defined, and powers in authority and in decision-making must be known by all.
The instructions and rules of operations must also be clear and consistent, in other words, they must be written down and approved.
Operational order must respect principles of engagement as well as the rights and duties of the agents and litigants.
These responsibilities, instructions and rules must be known, taught and practiced.
Everybody must undergo basic but also recurring training to guarantee unity of doctrine when implementing the organisation’s processes.
Training is hence the key to the success of the fight against corruption.
It must namely include modules about:
The organisation’s goals and objectives
Legal bases (legislation and rules) governing the organisation’s activities
Individual responsibility and consequences
Rights and obligations of members of the organisation
Internal investigations about malfunctions and their legal (penal) and administrative
(dismissal, pay cuts) consequences
And, of course, work ethics and deontology.
Beyond this, training will of course include the technical aspects of the job.
In other words, training requires time investment.
This investment not only trains future managers and staff, but it also exists to test and assess them throughout the training period.
Sometimes, this helps to detect individuals who may have chosen the wrong career path.
Recruiting is therefore a first vital step.
Employment criteria must be known, published, and above all, applied.
Effective recruitment requires selection based on objective criteria, such as the level of education required, the age limits for recruitment, physical condition, required training, criminal record.
Only the people who meet all these requirements can be hired.
If at this point, special treatment is given, nothing can guarantee future behaviours in terms of corruption an ethics.
Obviously, these criteria must apply fairly to both the junior recruits at the beginning of their career, as well as to managers of all levels.
To conclude, let’s remember that leadership’s responsibility is key in the fight against corruption.
Leadership must play its controlling role actively, but must also undergo control itself.
People from the higher levels of the hierarchy must also set themselves objectives.
These objectives have to be translated into directives and orders that can be understood by staff from all ranks.
The issue of the preparation and distribution of these orders will be discussed in the next module.
