To kick off this module about issuing orders and instructions, we need to start by setting the general context.
There are indeed several command and management levels that imply different order classifications.
At every level, the most important part is to make sure the common goal is reached together by all subordinates, in other words, the mission must be fulfilled in common.
A clear system must be used when issuing orders to subordinates, so that they understand what is expected of them and why.
As we’ve already said, there are many levels of command – they are briefly described in this table.
Strategic command is related to public authorities, to the senior management of big companies and to the high command of the police or the army.
In this MOOC we won’t be looking at this level.
Operative command involves commitment in synergy with different bodies that have to take action together.
This includes for instance joint action of the police, firemen and health services during large forest fires.
Generally, this requires the creation of a special task force, as a staff, with its own dedicated structure, namely facilities equipped with means of communication.
Tactical or operative command focuses on the work of units directly involved on the field.
Most of the time, at this level, the leader can lead his team by himself, without the help of a specially and formally established staff or headquaters.
In this MOOC, we will move back and forth between tactical command and operative command, so it will be important to know what we are talking about.
All security organisations like the army, the police, private security agencies and teams dedicated to the conservation of protected areas, have a mission, a target to achieve.
In the example displayed here, the mission is still quite general - the first line is strategic, while the second one covers the operative level.
It doesn’t state the concrete actions each associate must carry out, so the mission will have to be analysed and declined into concrete actions for subordinates.
The mission displayed on the screen right now is of a lower level, close to the tactical level, but still covering part of the operative level, as nothing is said concerning the means at hand (staff, arsenal, duration).
This mission is a bit more concrete than the previous one, but must be clarified to address collaborators on the field.
Here we are at the tactical level of the squadron commander.
He will have to give a couple of extra precisions to the team leaders under him.
It will then be up to each team leader to give further instructions based on the sector they are in charge of (bush, mountain, urban area).
Notice how the levels of command form a chain reaction from top to bottom when it comes to mission assignments.
Each level must be aware of this system, not only executive officers as they apply it, but also subordinates to understand it.
When the global operation is complex and involves a lot of staff, the number of levels between operation leaders and basic collaborator increases.
This order preparation system will help managers have a standardised way of thinking, that ensures all relevant parameters have been considered, to guarantee the mission is fulfilled.
The more this method is practiced, known and applied, the more the one using it will be able to think fast and effectively, even when he faces unexpected crises or finds himself under time pressure.
Thus, during training, exercises must be as realistic as possible, and involve both leaders and their subordinates.
These exercises must be prepared by keeping in mind what level of command should be applied: operative, tactical, or both at the same time?
Finally, despite the very formal aspect of what has been said in this sequence, the personality of each leader influences the way he faces and assesses problems.
His level of experience may lead him to choose original or daring solutions, that a beginner would hesitate on.
In the following sequences, we will be seeing that the systematic method doesn’t exclude the personality of actors involved.
We will also see that there are often different possible options available to face a new problem or achieve a mission.
We’ll see how to choose among these options, namely by considering the risk assessment that can impact fulfilling the mission.
Finally, ethics and human rights must fully be part of each step of the process.
