Surveillance relies on suitable material and equipment to carry out operations on the field.
Field agents with proper individual and collective equipment have stronger capacities of intervention, and are more motivated to carry out their mission.
Individual equipment includes uniforms, raincoats, tents, sleeping mats and sleeping bags, backpacks, camel bags, shoes, water bottles and weapons.
If possible, every agent is responsible for the maintenance of his own equipment.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the State provides agents with a yearly supply of outfits.
Projects in different parks support the acquisition for each ranger of an additional outfit like a tent and a sleeping mat.
Collective equipment ensures the accomplishment of the mission by facilitating travelling, bivouac and camping, good communication inside the patrol team and with the base, but also the collection of patrolling data.
Proper vehicles are required to facilitate team travels and to improve responsiveness.
Unit mobility on the entire PA is key to face aggressions and to ensure the security of all.
According to the specificities of each park, vehicles can consist in four-by-fours fitted with special equipment and traction tools.
Chainsaws are also needed, as well as boats equipped with life rings, jet skis and bikes that can also be a good quick response tool.
In some parks, patrols are done with horses, bicycles and even quads.
In some larger parks like the Kruger in South
Africa, several planes are deployed for proper surveillance of the territory.
A maintenance and replacement plan guarantees operational equipment, thereby ensuring agent mobility at all times.
For bivouac and camping, kits need to be made available for teams with kitchenware and camping materials adapted to every type of environment.
These should be easily transportable for foot patrols.
Food rations can be provided to agents to ensure their daily food intake.
They can consist in specialised rations, or in local meals with, if possible, some high-energy dried foods.
To manage stocks, a good option is to set menus.
For instance, in Côte d’Ivoire, two methods are used: food is directly provided by management, or money is provided so that agents can organise food rations themselves for patrols.
A first aid kit with medication can also be provided to each patrol team.
Communication materials include VHF radios and their accessories or satellite phones, or cell phones with solar panels and portable chargers.
Radios enable secure communication with the possibility to track positions and patrol teams in real time, but they are expensive and not always adapted to the forest cover.
For intelligence, digital cameras and voice recorders can be useful to collect data and build a case against suspects.
To guide teams on the field and to collect patrolling data, technical surveillance equipment is required.
This includes GPSs, compasses, tablets or digital cameras.
CLIC
In terms of equipment, providing patrol teams with weapons and ammunition is a real challenge.
Nowadays, poachers’ level of equipment requires rangers to be properly equipped and trained.
This isn’t always the case in countries where surveillance is delegated to paramilitary forces, in spite of weapon training being provided by the military.
When weapons are made available, an inventory and strict management and maintenance system should secure weapons in armouries and keep them in good working condition.
Carrying out joint patrols with other units
(military, police) is essential when the threat exceeds the normal intervention capacities of forest guards.
Finally, infrastructures and facilities must be designed specifically to facilitate surveillance, such as base camps or a mechanical garage for vehicle maintenance, and of course, landing runways distributed throughout the park for planes and ULMs.
Basically, to ensure optimal conditions and effectiveness of surveillance activities, equipment must always be in good working condition.
