New technologies can improve the effectiveness of law enforcement in protected areas.
There is enormous unexplored potential, but this sequence will only provide a short overview of what is already out there.
Have a look at these websites to find out more, especially on the WCPA website which has a working group on new technologies.
So let’s focus on a couple of the most commonly used solutions.
One vital aspect of these technologies is their ability to connect with each other and create a rapid flow of information.
Thereby providing a proper response in due time.
This is a limiting factor in remote areas where there is no cellular network.
But there are always relay solutions based on private radio networks, or other technologies like drones or satellites.
Another key aspect is data treatment automation that frees up time for practical action.
This is based on the development of softwares that can do a job better and faster than a person would.
They can, for example, analyse hundreds of hours of video to find a specific animal in just a couple of minutes.
On this basis: 1- connectivity and 2- automation.
Many solutions are being developed.
They aim at protecting a territory or a species, improving surveillance practices and tools, reinforcing detection, information and communication abilities as well, and ranger or visitor safety.
At a larger scale, satellites can be used for surveillance… namely by detecting changes in the habitat or forest fires, by monitoring a species equipped with a transmitter, and even detect deep sea fishing.
One example of practical use is the cybertracker.
It is based on the GPS system which gives the exact location of where the infringement was detected – it is used in addition to software such as SMART.
Closer to the ground, the use of drones is spreading.
They are equipped with detectors, and can virtually search and find anything you want.
They can have rotary wings, in which case they are generally used to explore certain perimeters with relatively low autonomy.
They can also have fixed wings, and in this case, they are able to cover hundreds of hectares. this is especially the case for solar-powered models.
These drones can also be a relay for information transmission when there is no connectivity in the park.
For example, by overflying camera traps daily, and by downloading the data obtained.
Even closer to the ground, sensors can be deployed.
They would capture the information and transmit it.
A good example are the camera traps which we talked about in the MOOC on ecological monitoring, which can be connected to a base that receives all the images and videos.
A simple recognition software would then directly process the photos and videos and extract the ones, for example, where a human is detected to immediately inform the anti-poaching patrol.
Acoustic transmitters can also be used – they detect chainsaws, gun shots, human voices or engine sounds.
They inform rangers in real time with the exact location of the sound through simple triangulation.
Sensors detect the vibrations on the ground and send notifications when a vehicle drives by.
The vehicle would then be followed by a drone for identification, then by a patrol to arrest the intruder.
Infra-red cameras placed at park access-points detect body heat at night.
A recognition software will then distinguish human from animal shapes, and alert security rangers.
Nowadays, there are mobile towers thanks to which these cameras can be moved when needed, and elevated to enable a better coverage of the area.
There are more and more solutions that contribute to daily animal protection.
Tracking collars, radios, GPSs and satellites adapt to large species.
Not only do they track their movements, but also their biological parameters which detects periods of stress to enable immediate action.
The same goes for microchips that can be implanted to many animal or plant species such as a tree trunk, so that the day this tree is cut down and moved, the chip will follow the movement of the trunk and its location by sending notifications through the cellular network.
Elephant collars, rhino bracelets, tags for birds, chips on trees, drones for mapmaking, radars for surveillance, specialised sensors to detect movement, sound and heat, software adapted to smartphones…
All these solutions already exist in the field in Africa, and are being tested in Namibia,
Malawi, Kenya, South Africa, Burkina Faso,
Benin etc.
At another scale, DNA analysis during seizures, wherever they occur, can trace back to when the crime was committed, thanks to a worldwide coded database of the different species.
This way, the point of origin of a rhino horn or a shark fin can be found!
Science-fiction or near future, some projects are developing mimetic robots that can place automated guards near species for 24/7 protection on the ground.
Possibilities are countless, and this already shakes up law enforcement methods in protected areas.
