Iraq, the cradle of civilization. 
The Tigris and Euphrates rivers join to form the Shatt al-Arab waterway.
But despite this massive water course, the region is essentially a desert.
The supply of water has always been a problem for the Iraqis.
The series of wars and the ten year embargo have blocked plans to develop modern efficient water delivery systems.
This film is intended to give an account of
ICRC’s effort to combat the widespread deterioration of Iraq’s infrastructure.
But recent events unfortunately got the upper hand.
The latest round of conflict hit Iraq like a tidal wave undermining all attempts to meet the essential needs of civilians.
A task which, according to the Geneva Convention, is the responsibility of the occupying power.
Now more than ever, water plays a critical role in the resolution of the crisis.
The ICRC has been present in Iraq carrying out its humanitarian mandate for over twenty two years.
At the time of the Gulf war twelve years ago, the situation reached catastrophic proportions and the ICRC stepped up its activities extending its far reach in water and sanitation program.
The objective has remained unchanged throughout the years in this extremely difficult context, to provide the civilian population with a clean safe drinking water which is essential for life.
In one conflict after another, major elements of the electrical power networks were destroyed resulting in the dropping capacity in the water treatment plants and pumping stations.
If there is no electricity, you will see how everything is here.
Everything depends on electricity.
If there is no electricity the whole plant is going to stop.
Half of Baghdad will have no drinking water, nothing.
The lack of spare parts, qualified help and logistical equipment hasten the general deterioration of Iraq’s infrastructure.
The sewage treatment and disposal system is on the point of collapse and often reach its full capacity.
The threat to public health is constant.
Waste is regularly discharged untreated into waterways. The long term consequences for the environment and public health are no less than a time bomb.
Most members of the population already worn down by the direct or indirect effect of ten years of embargo also suffer from a shortage of safe drinking water.
Recent conflicts have only aggravated the situation while completely blocking the supply of humanitarian aid.
The ICRC’s humanitarian activities over the past twelve years in Iraq developed in several stages.
During the 1991 Gulf war, the ICRC focused its efforts on emergency water distribution.
Tanker trucks and mobile water purification units succeeded in providing the population with temporary relief.
But it was necessary to adapt to the changing situation.
From 1991 to 1993, after an embargo was imposed by the U.N, the ICRC contributed actively to repair work on water installations by providing desperately needed spare parts.
But from 1994 to 1997, in view of the alarming deterioration of the water and sanitation services and the logistical difficulties faced by local officials, the ICRC had to take some of the maintenance and repair work into its own hands.
The program became more complex involving needs assessment, financial resources and technical know-how.
In 1998, the entry into force of the U.N’s all for food resolution made access to spare parts easier.
The Iraqi authorities could once again deal directly with foreign supplies.
The procedures for buying spare parts remained long and tedious and not enough supplies could be imported to deal with the situation.
The ICRC was therefore obliged to take on an even bigger role which nevertheless remained complimentary to local water boards.
The ICRC gave priority to sewage treatment plants, but it also worked to upgrade medical facilities that could no longer provide essential health care services.
Complimenting the easing of restrictions under the U.N’s oil for food resolution, ICRC was able to slow the inevitable deterioration of Iraq’s water supply system.
But the great majority of Iraqis are still forced to live with chronic shortages of safe drinking water.
The existing supplies constantly threatened by water-borne diseases which the existing health care facilities are unable to treat effectively.
The situation worsened during the recent war.
In March 2003, the ICRC was the only humanitarian organization to remain in the country throughout the conflict.
Thanks to its experience on the ground, sustained relationships with the water boards and credibility, the ICRC remained effective in an extremely hostile environment which included not only the violence of the fighting but also destructive looting.
Although water treatment facilities suffered little direct harm, damage to the power supply caused major cuts in water supply from the very first hours of the conflict.
People had to manage as best as they could to get to the water they needed.
The immediate challenge for the ICRC is to intervene without delay in areas where epidemics of infectious diseases are a real risk.
The ICRC has played a unifying and catalyzing role between the occupying forces administration and Iraqi professionals.
But effective work depends on maintaining security and restoring a fully functional local administration, both are the responsibilities of the occupying power.
The ICRC’s tireless efforts are ensuring that it can play a vital role in the reconstruction of Iraq during the post war period.
But beyond emergency measures, the ICRC’s main concern would be to ensure that the supply of clean water can be guaranteed in a long term and sustainable way through cooperation with Iraqi water and health authorities and companies.
Only a rigorous self sufficient local economy will bring about a durable improvement in the situation, ensuring quality water and sanitation services for everyone.
