Hello and welcome to our video.
Second part of what is Urban Planning.
The first part, we had it the first week of registration was an introduction to planning, and we would like in this video, to go a little bit further with you today.
To begin, we're going to quote
Saint-Exupéry, just this once, who said: "A goal without a plan is just a wish. "
This is the starting point from which we would like to start, that is to say, to have a goal so that this goal transforms in something possible, convincing, it's about having the tool which allows for the implementation of this goal.
The tool, most of the time, is a plan.
Then of course the planning is not summed up by the plan, but it is one of the main instruments of this planning.
We could do planning with taxation, with public politics, with a number of other instruments that are available, but, traditionally, globally, in the majority of cases, when we are speaking of urban planning, we are referring to plan: Master plans, zoning plans, blueprints, you name it, it's more or less always the same type of instrument that is used.
Let's go back to the actual context, once again, we are not going to go over what has already been said, simply to clarify a little, you must keep in mind, an increase in areas of substandard housing.
It is one of the urban problems today, there is an impoverishment of the population, but overall, on the entire surface of cities in Africa today, in sub-Saharan Africa, there is an increase of surface area devoted to substandard housing or slums.
Then, to take the second element, we have an urbanization, we've seen that this is created without economic development, but to speak in terms of urban planning, particularly planning that is disproportionate to the need for transportation, with the need for servicing, with the overall need for networks.
There it is.
And in regards to this issue of networks, of this issue in particular of servicing or of transportation, usually public transportation, there is a big deficit in the African cities, to which the issues of informality are added.
We also have already seen, already had some hints of informality being a system that is superimposed on the formal system.
We have shown it very well in most of our writing, it is not informality on one side and what is formal on the other, but these two systems totally interlocked, both playing the formal and informal, depending on the situation.
We easily realize that the literature presents informality as being more the domain of the poor, which would really be in the informal to compensate for the lack of formality or the possibility of formalizing a number of things from the State, so the poorest would be more informal than the richest, yet we have seen it in very precise cases, particularly in housing, it is mostly the elites who are in the informal role.
Why the poorest?
Let's take the property for example.
When they have a plot would inevitably like to have a land title and will do anything to appear in front of the the notary to have the necessary papers so that they cannot be criticized or removed.
That they cannot be criticized for not having or not being the owners of the land.
Yet the richest do exactly the opposite.
No need for a building permit, no need for a title, they begin to build they build their property and they know that, through the informal system they will be able very quickly to find themselves in a situation that in the end will be formal.
But we see that formality is not really the domain of the poorest but of the richest.
So we have an urbanization that has no ties to its own networks, and its own networks and its own means of transportation are increasingly informal.
This is the context today in which we find ourselves when we must plan the city.
Last element of this context, is finally, the planning, even if it is relatively old in the African cities, it is still at the prototype level.
It is still to be tested and it is emerging .
Of course the major capitals had their plans very quickly, but the rest of the cities had in principle very little, if at all, of town planning.
So it's something relatively emerging, it is a discipline which is not constituted as a disciplinary field but eventually comes at the articulation of many disciplines, which is its very nature, which is all very well, but which also means that it is its weakness since it doesn't have its own discipline that would support this planning.
So there are definitely great challenges, we have already seen it considerably in the introduction, great challenges for the cities, and there is a need to plan. ,
Why plan?
Why, simply because the city as such, even it is the most beautiful of living organisms, even if it's a sort of ecosystem, it would be the natural habitat, as some would say, the natural habitat of man, even if the city appears to be an ecosystem, we realize that it doesn't manage itself, that it doesn't generate itself spontaneously in a desirable way for the collective.
So we are obligated at any given moment to clearly intervene, in this development, so it's a interventionist notion in planning because things in and of themselves are not done spontaneously and those that are done spontaneously are not necessarily those that are desired.
That is the first thing.
The second thing is from the Gestalt theory, which is that the total is greater than the sum of the parts.
This means that the individual interests of some do not form a public interest, but that the public interest is above all of this.
As a result, I cannot see in individual interest but the total, the sum of the total, that's something else and for this
I am obligated to plan not for the individual interests but that of the collective.
The need for planning comes also from that fact that the resources are limited and that changes are fast.
So I have to have a road map to know where I am, at all times, and to be able in this way to adjust and react quickly depending on the situation, depending on an economic crisis, depending on immigrant arrival, this speed of urban changes.
Finally we are discussing limited resources, which are also financially limited, and so 
I have to plan to use them in the most efficient way possible so as not to waste or lose the resources, the scarce resources that I have available to me.
The very foundations of zoning plans, is then about managing or controlling the soil.
We are speaking of sustainable soil management.
Zoning plans also have to control displacement, to try to reduce it as much as possible.
Zoning plans give us indications about the areas, about the type of areas, that we would want in different parts of the city, it's about housing, industry, green space, not to mention only the main area, the central space and finally the plan must allow for the management of resources and the heritage that we have available.
So this, it's an important element, the planning must especially allow for the management of natural resources as well as the management of cultural resources via heritage.
So we take what we have already seen, the three types of plans, the first, orientation requirement, detailed orientation requirements and the requirements for the soil usage.
So here, we have a limit since this is what is called binding against third parties, which is the force of law, while the orientation requirements or detailed orientation are for the administration but are force of law for those that are private.
So often with the plans, there is a legislative and regulatory context.
There are no countries where there aren't countless regulations, it goes against what we generally believe because it says that cities are not planned, certainly, there isn't really a zoning plan, on the other hand there is a whole armada of legislative texts which provide a very important legal framework.
And we could even imagine that, seeing the number of codes and laws and orders and decrees in planning or annexed areas we don't need plans since in the end all these legislative texts are sufficiently abundant to manage all of the urban issues.
So, depending on the country, there may be Urban Codes,
Environment Codes,
Construction Codes,
Architecture Codes, often it's somewhat the same thing, Water Codes, the law instituting the urban community when we have an urban community, the decentralization laws which determine the town governments, in particular there can be property laws, a whole series of other laws or other Codes that are in one way or another related to the issues of planning.
Finally, when we are talking about plans, when we are talking about tools, which are the orientation requirements or land use?
We must quickly discuss methodology since we have a sort of basic plan for the elaboration of master plans and in general we go from a first stage of training and sensitization of stakeholders.
So this can be a ministry, the urban communities but anyone who will have anything to say about the master plan.
It is very important that they be conscious and trained in the usage and language of the master plan.
Then a diagnostic is established.
This is the current situation of the city, the day that we look at the situation.
This means that we are at the beginning of our planning.
The orientations are going to be defined, we have already seen this.
On the basis of a diagnosis, we define the orientations that we will give once spatialised, a plan that will have a horizon of 10 or 20 years.
Farther along, it doesn't really make sense since we have already seen, things change quickly so we have a horizon of 10 years or 20 years.
So we must pay attention that the elaboration of the four stages don't take 10 years alone as we saw a few years ago particularly in Abidjan where preparatory studies lasted almost 10 years.
This means that the first study which was done, the diagnostic, if 10 years later the plan is still not ready, you are obligated to do the studies once again and this is never ending so all these stages should be done in a relatively short or very short period of time.
It is better to do it several times very short than a single time where it's believed that formalizing the issue is going to work and finally we realize that at the point where this formalization is finished, it's no longer the same issue.
Once the plan is elaborated, we put it in motion.
Instructions will be given to put the plan in motion with a number of accompanying measures.
A program with priority investments will be developed.
So we should put it between brackets like this.
Why?
Because it depends heavily on donor funds.
Certain donors don't want to make a priority investments program and just want to do the planning.
Other donors find it important that this planning be accompanied by a certain number of projects that are feasible right away, and others feasible in the long term but this planning without projects to be completed is not good for anything.
The next stage of communication.
The one which is forgotten, in theory, the fastest because most people don't see the issue there would be behind it.
When really this is an extremely important stage since it is perhaps this stage on which success rests and not on the plan or in any case of it's being put in motion.
Finally, the evaluation stage.
So for this, one needs to have precise criteria, specific prerequisites.
What are we going to evaluate?
Evaluating for the sake of evaluating doesn't do anything; evaluating if we know what we are going to evaluate is useful so we know if it was efficient or not when we made our plan.
Here is a quick example of a plan, 
Nouakchott plan in Mauritania still, a 1983 plan with a horizon in 1990.
We see that it is in the detail there.
The plan is a little bit deformed but that's okay.
We see the city center with a cutout of the land by land use.
Another plan, the blueprint for urban development, still in the city of Nouakchott, we can see that there are two types of different plans.
The first dates from 83, the second from 2002 with a horizon in 2010.
We see that they are excessively different in their shape and then with a first horizon of the plan in 2010 and a second in 2020 where bypasses have been drawn around the city.
The city of Nouakchott, the two examples shown will be the focus of a separate case study in a video this week.
So we will not go on here on the case of the city of Nouakchott.
And then, to wrap it up, we will show an example of the urban master plan of Dakar, horizon of 2025 where we see those who know it well,
Lac Rose, which is here and 
15 years ago it was difficult to locate, to go to Lac Rose.
Today, urbanization has taken the whole scope of Dakar.
We still see some green breakthroughs a few unoccupied areas but fewer and fewer.
The rest of the city of Dakar is completely urbanized or being urbanized.
So there you have the second part of 
Urban Planning.
I'll see you in the following videos.
