Planning infrastructure.
Infrastructure is actually what defines how well a city is doing what shapes a city, determines planning.
It also conditions the city pattern, so it is extremely important.
Infrastructure is central to urban planning.
We have transportation infrastructure, drinking water infrastructure, several types of infrastructure, as we have previously noted.
What we'll do today is to think about factoring infrastructure in urban planning.
First of all, let's consider that there are great discrepancies between cities.
Why is it so?
Because there are discrepancies between countries.
Some countries, some regions are wealthier that others.
There are discrepancies between urban areas and rural areas, between capital cities and other cities.
Sometimes even within one district there may be discrepancies.
Which means the approach we'll take and the way to set up a facility will vary according to the city, and there are just as many situations as there are districts.
To give a definition, since we like to define the words we use: infrastructure refers to all the facilities that are useful to keep the city running.
Infrastructure and facilities, broadly speaking, are considered together, as parts of the same thing, which means we're talking about roads as well as schools.
Infrastructure and facilities are often considered separately, but when it comes to operating a city, the very definition shows that it's exactly the same use.
When planning, we need to know the needs in terms of infrastructure, both in terms of quantity and of quality.
Quantity is usually expressed in square meters when talking about inhabitants, or in kilowatts per capita, when talking about energy or water.
Quality refers to costs, to the quality of the service provided, to management, and to the quality of the product provided.
Let's take water as an example once again: the quantity and the quality of the water matter, but also the quality of the service provided, meaning is there a 24-hour supply?
There may be good quality water in large supply but only in the morning.
On the opposite side, there may be a 24-hour large supply of a very mediocre quality water.
These parameters need to be assessed.
They are what we call the needs.
What are the needs we are faced with when planning?
We tend to consider different levels of service.
We have the type of need, what is needed and then level 1, level 2, etc.
These are the response to the need.
When it comes to water, there is a need of 30 liters per day and per head, which is the basic need, a very small amount, but let's take it as our base.
Then we define level 1 as providing 30 liters, a service a bit better would be providing 60 liters, and then 90 liters.
The same goes for all other facilities.
Every time, there is the basic need and how I respond to it is the level of service I implement.
Then there are the standards applying to facilities.
So, on one hand, we look at the needs to determine a certain number of levels of services, and at the same time there are standards for facilities, with, for example if we take primary schools the maximum distance should be 1.5 km,
20 minutes walk, and one school for every 8000 inhabitants.
I gathered these standards here and there and they do not apply everywhere.
The problem is that we give too much importance to standards whereas in fact we never managed to apply these figures.
But you should know that they exist, even though they're not the best approach to planning.
However, you must bear in mind that there must be hydrants, sports ground, and maximum distances to comply with.
When talking about infrastructure, the customers, the inhabitants, must have access to it without paying a price that is too high relatively to their income.
But suppliers must also make a living, which means that investing in it should be profitable.
Another phenomenon is the impact on land prices.
The more infrastructure on a land, with the limited nuisance it means, the higher the prices of the land.
This eventually leads to social exclusion, the poor not having access anymore to the perimeter of the infrastructure.
The most striking example of this, and it's an example among many, we find this in New York, in Lausanne, but in the case of the school of Rabat where the people who are willing to use the tramway are a special category: the higher classes will not, for a question of prestige, the poor will not, for lack of financial means, so it is the middle class who has the means to use the tramway.
However, the tramway is in the city center, and the middle class cannot live near it anymore, because it pushed land prices and rents up.
So those taking the tramway cannot afford to live in the areas where the tramway goes, all of it pushing the poor further outside the city.
As a result, Morocco and the city of Rabat tried to adapt the fares to offset this sort of things.
Let's remember this: infrastructure can lead to the social exclusion of a large segment of society.
A brief overview.
We won't go into the details of every type of infrastructure.
Keep in mind that there is a link with the price of land, which matters.
The second thing is that one must determine a certain number of needs, even though, unfortunately, we're not always able to meet those needs.
