Polytechnic
Mobile Lives
Santiago in Chile and its new bus system with high level of service
I would like to discuss change in travel habits and mobility patterns in the city of Santiago in Chile, and specifically how and why user behavior has changed since the introduction of a transportation system completely new in this city.
Why Santiago? This is an interesting case study considering the significant transformation that the city has known for transport over the past decade.
Before 2007, the city was characterized by the coexistence of two parallel systems and totally independent of one another.
On one side, a few lines of uncrowded subways, consequences of not very expanded network and of relatively high tariffs.
On the other, a mode of organization typical of many cities of developing countries and emerging economies: a bus system without any regulation, with a glut of private operators offering services with private bus.
A chaotic service at the origin of many accidents, of noise and pollution, but which also had advantages for users.
They had only to leave home to hop on a bus at the place of their choice, since there was no fixed stops.
Free to them to cross the whole city on the same bus, by paying an only trip, without having to change buses or go from the bus to the subway.
Complete modernization of the system
However, noting the noise, pollution and the frequency of accidents, but also the fact that a growing share of the motorized population avoided this chaotic system by moving by car, the government has decided to modernize the existing system by launching a system of "Bus Rapid Level" (BRT)
This term refers to a system where buses circulate only on a own site like metro or tram.
There are articulated buses of big capacity, very comfortable, that can carry many passengers.
Normally, a BRT network also includes, like the subway, a special ticket booth and a sophisticated passenger information.
It was also planned to link the system called Transantiago to the ublic metro to propose a common tariff and allow users to take both means of transport with only one ticket issued by the electronic ticketing system.
This very ambitious and sophisticated system was put into operation in Santiago in February 2007.
It is not surprising that its beginnings were catastrophic.
Users were completely lost because change was simply too radical and too brutal.
Several reasons can be advanced.
On one hand, many technical malfunctions were observed, related to initial network design problems, to the insufficient number of buses, to corridors still in construction after commissioning, etc.
But the initial difficulties were also due the total disorientation of users, who did not know how to use the new system.
This was the starting point of my research.
The "captive users" with good access to the car
I wanted to know exactly what were the problems encountered by users and their impact on the way they move in the city, the composition of on their daily life and the overall organization of everyday activities.
I selected five of the 37 districts of the city, which are very different according to income height and access to transport.
Some neighborhoods are served by the subway, and others not, some are totally dependent on the bus.
Equally important point, it is primarily the rich neighborhoods that access to the car, while the modest neighborhoods especially those in the periphery are generally entirely dependent on public transport.
We are talking about "captive users" to express the fact that they have no choice: the public transport is their only alternative.
A large correlation between car ownership and high incomes
Obviously, these difficulties have not had the same impact on everyone.
As I said, the level of dependence of users in respect of transport is decisive.
I prepared four cards displaying the 37 districts of the metropolitan area.
Green always indicates a low value and red a high value.
We see two things first, we see a strong correlation between the average income and owning a car, and the number of daily trips by private transport, on the other hand, we see that all people with high incomes are concentrated in a sector the "cone of wealth" from the east of the city, in red on the map,
This shows that social segregation is important in Santiago.
The people of this district are favored for two reasons.
They have easy access to the car and are not dependent on public transport, their mobility is thus important.
They live in an area where many shops are concentrated, workplaces, leisure and relaxation, and therefore do not have much distance to travel even if they are more mobile than others.
Technical problems with motility
Transantiago's problems are twofold: on the one hand the technical problems previously mentioned of the network, lines and bus stops, etc.
Obviously the plan did not work very well at first, but the solutions are simple, even if they are costly in time and money.
The majority of the necessary improvements have been made in the three years following the set of the Transantiago service.
Add to this a whole range of issues to the users' skills to their ease, their habits and preferences regarding movement.
This second type of problems proved more persistent and difficult to solve than the authorities had first envisaged.
From the D system to a more sophisticated traveler information
Take an example on the skills of travelers on travel:
Access to transportation information available.
Before, in the era of unregulated system the inhabitants were accustomed to coping, to learn informally.
They asked their relatives or directly to the bus driver, to determine the route that would take them from one point to another.
Now, with the Transantiago, the system is much more complex: it is based on an information system for travelers worthy of the name, that integrates network maps, an internet platform, a call center, etc.
As shown in this graph, the less educated users continue to rely on informal sources of information, even with the Transantiago, which is much harder than the days of unregulated system.
Only the most educated groups actually use the internet platform, network plans, etc.
By the same logic, we see on the second graph that travelers declare on their own having more or less ease or difficulty to use the Transantiago.
The least educated people consider the Transantiago very complicated, while the more educated groups generally do not have problems, realization that however is relative in relation to their low attendance of public transport; they are not dependent on it which facilitates the task.
It is only an example of issues linked to skills of travel-related users. I could mention many more.
In summary, the problems are mainly related to the need to plan the trip upstream: the need to recharge their electronic ticket before boarding the bus, to find the best path to get to the right stop and then to have changes.
Matches are a universal phenomenon: nobody particularly like to change transport.
Here too, in Europe, we prefer to stay longer on board of the same mode of transportation to avoid a change rather than a short ride which involves one or two connexions.
Captives travelers travel less and avoid motorized transport.
So here's an overview of problems. I want to follow the impact of this problematic transport system on the lives of users.
In my survey, about 12% of respondents say explicitly they have changed routes and travel habits after encountering problems with Transantiago.
Again, they were largely
"captive travelers" who are essentially people with low incomes, who do not own cars, the elderly as well as many women, including a significant number still has not a licence in Santiago.
With the new system, they travel less, especially for leisure; they renounce to many trips they used to do with an unregulated system and prefer to stay at home.
They make shorter trips. and therefore remain closer to their place of residence where they can get around on foot or bicycle, so as to avoid motorized transport.
The private car is gaining ground
Third, the respective shares of different means of transport
Santiago used to show that the use of the private car has increased significantly.
While the bus has given a lot of ground to the subway, whose network expanded and access has been democratized through common tariffs, but also for the benefit of private cars and taxis.
This development is problematic from an environmental and social perspective.
The change should not be too brutal
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize three key points.
First, regarding the movement of skills, it is important to stress the need, in areas or areas with a major reorganization of transport, to train people to use the new system.
A too sudden or a too radical change is never desirable.
Users should familiarize themselves gradually with the new system, otherwise they will fail to appropriate it.
For captive travelers, social life goes through public transport
Secondly, about the changes in frequency and length of trips, transportation is a determining factor - can not be the main but nevertheless decisive - of the ability to lead a social life.
With a lack of mobility, people can not enjoy their leisure, work, study, etc. it shows the importance of public transport, particularly for captive travelers who have no other means than the bus or subway to get around.
The car, still a determinant key of social status
Last observation, not least related to the previous point.
Today, many people prefer the car to the bus, while one of the ambitions of Transantiago was to attract motorists to make them passengers.
Of course, there can be no question of providing each citizen a car on behalf of transport for all.
The non-driving phenomenon of the entire population is an opportunity and can therefore be analyzed in positive terms.
The need to use public transport can help developing a more sustainable urban transport system.
But the implementation of public transport systems more developed or more efficient is not enough; we must still consider the place of the car and of the correlative behavior.
We can of course expect a disadvantage of the car, related to its cost and implementation restrictions, but it is also to question the image of the car.
In Santiago, as elsewhere I think, the car is still an important status symbol of independence, privacy, traveling comfort, optimal mobility.
And as long as people do not become aware of problems related to its extensive use
-traffic jams, pollution, space consumption, etc.- they will not be willing to shift to another mode of travel such as public transport.
MOBILE LIVES FORUM September 2013
