Welcome to the first week of our new course on planning and design of sanitation systems and technologies.
My name is Christophe Lüthi.
I am an Urban Infrastructure Planner and I have been teaching and and carrying out research for the
Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic
Science and Technology, in Switzerland for the last 10 years.
In the next five weeks, we will be exploring some of the issues and challenges in urban sanitation.
What makes urban sanitation so different from rural contexts?
Urban settings feature a number of distinct characteristics that need to be considered.
Firstly, different urban contexts or domains - from modern, inner-city or planned areas, to the dense, informal settlements and slum neighborhoods found in most cities of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America.
And finally, the fast growing city periphery also called the peri-urban interface.
These different contexts and settings call for specific solutions when seeking appropriate and sustainable services.
In this course, we will exploring urban sanitation systems and services, and why urban sanitation requires different approaches, funding mechanisms and distinct technology solutions.
Let's take a look at a typical low-income area in an African city.
Some of the challenges found in neighborhoods like these are unsanitary environments lack of space for sanitation facilities, like the toilet shown here and informal often unhygienic toilet emptying, or urban open defecation.
So, what can be done about this situation?
In this course, we will focus on a key concept of urban sanitation the Sanitation Value Chain. We will highlight the different components and functional groups, as in the example shown here.
First, the user interface or pit latrine, in red the safe storage of human waste in the septic tank, in orange followed by the collection and mechanical emptying of the sludge through the yellow exhauster trucks.
The safely collected sludge is then brought to proper treatment in a sludge-drying bed, shown here in green; and finally the reuse of hygienized sludge in urban agriculture, shown in blue.
The Value Chain allows for a realistic assessment of a range of sanitation options and solutions, and its technical and managerial implications.
Our five-week course will be examining the issues around the planning and design of appropriate sanitation systems and technologies proper management arrangements and the and the financial implications involved.
The Sanitation Value Chain shown here will be our guiding concept.
Let's take a look at the learning goals.
Firstly, we'd like you to get familiar with urban sanitation planning tools and approaches, and be able to analyze case studies and discuss advantages and disadvantages.
Secondly, we'd like you to know the existing options of sanitation systems and technologies, and be able to design a technical project and analyze proposals.
And lastly, we'd like you to understand which systems and technologies are most appropriate in different contexts.
We'll be looking at different systems and technologies, the institutions, and stakeholders that need to be involved.
We'll also be presenting different projects and case studies which exemplify different approaches of urban sanitation.
And, we'll also be looking at planning frameworks and approaches, and the design of sanitation systems in different contexts.
This gives you an overview of the course contents.
In Week One, we will be dealing with city sanitation and looking at a number of planning frameworks for example: Sanitation 21, by the
International Water Association.
In Week Two, we'll be dealing with different sanitation products the five functional groups of the sanitation chain and give you an introduction to different technologies.
In Week Three, we'll be dealing with sanitation systems, the second part of technologies, especially those dealing with treatment and use or disposal.
In Week Four, we have three case studies prepared from China, Indonesia and Nepal.
In Week Five, the last week, we will prepare a talk show with a Q&A session answering some of the questions that come up during the course of these five weeks.
And then finally, wrap up and the final exam, where you'll be able to evaluate what what you've learned in the past five weeks.
Here we list the required reading for this course.
Firstly, the "Compendium of
Sanitation Systems and Technologies" this is available in English, in French and in Spanish.
Secondly, "Sanitation 21 - An Integrated
Planning Approach for City Sanitation" available only in English; and lastly,
"CLUES - Community-led Urban Environmental 
Sanitation Planning Framework" available in English and Spanish.
All three documents are available for download from this website.
On behalf of my team, I'm looking forward to the course, and to hearing your contributions in the forum.
Let's start the course now, with the first module, about City Sanitation Planning by Jonathan Parkinson.
Enjoy.
