Hi. Welcome back to the second part of the lecture in Sanitation Planning Module, focusing on the development of strategies for city-wide sanitation improvement.
This follows on from the previous model, which provided an introduction to issues related to the development of sustainable sanitation services and the influences that these have on urban sanitation planning.
We focus here on a more detailed understanding of some of the key principles of good planning, and introduce some tools to support the development of city-wide sanitation plans linking local level with city level initiatives.
Sanitation21 is a document produced by the International Water Association in partnership with Eawag and Giz.
Sanitation21 presents a framework for city sanitation planning based on international best practice, where planning has been key to achieving improvements in urban sanitation.
It sets out key principles and process guidelines to help city sanitation stakeholders develop appropriate and affordable solutions to sanitation problems, taking into account technology issues, management arrangements, institutional challenges, and demand for improvement from different stakeholders.
The Sanitation21 planning process is presented around the following five stages: firstly, building institutional commitment and partnership for planning.
Secondly, understanding the existing context and defining priorities.
Stage 3 involves developing strategies for sanitation system improvement, this focusing very much on the technological side.
Stage 4 involves developing models for service delivery, management arrangements, financing mechanisms.
And stage 5 involves preparing for implementation.
One of the inherent challenges with sanitation planning and subsequent implementation of city plans is that they require a range of institutions and organizations to work together.
Consequently, the success of sanitation planning activity will be strongly influenced by the extent of collaboration between the local authorities, utilities and other stakeholders involved in the provision or regulation of sanitation services.
Planning is essentially about responding to real needs and making informed decisions about investments for sanitation improvements, involving the prudent use of resources to meet recognized priorities.
Successful sanitation planning activities need to be based on a sound understanding of the existing situation, and respond to demands for an improved sanitation service at different levels.
Understanding the existing context is critical.
In relation to technical considerations, the following tools are recommended as ways to support the sanitation planning process.
One of the most essential ones, and perhaps the most basic one, is a process of sanitation system mapping, which simply means mapping the existing sanitation coverage and location of facilities for collection and treatment of waste.
Another tool, building on this, involves supply-demand analysis.
So this looks in more detail at those systems and assessing their capacity in relation to the amount of waste that is produced.
This provides a basis for identifying what parts of the system are overloaded and what parts of the system have capacity.
Another tool is the environmental health risk assessment methodology.
This looks at sanitation interventions and uses risk assessment to assess which communities are most prone to sanitation related risks, and this can help to target investments for these areas.
Additional tools can be used for financial and economic analysis.
Sanitation market assessment is increasingly used to look at sanitation service providers and their services in relation to demand from different customers, dividing customers into a range of different segments and looking at how different service providers meet their needs.
A key part of this is financial analysis, looking at different options in relation to the existing sanitation services, the cost of them, and the affordability of services.
In this diagram we see the varied nature of settlements and cities, highlighting that there is a need for a range of sanitation service models appropriate for different physical and socio-economic contexts.
The characteristics of low income settlements in informal and peri-urban areas means that they are intrinsically more difficult to serve, and as a result conventional service delivery models are often not viable.
This may be due to physical constraints, such as low-lying ground, steep slopes, or densely packed housing with very poor access via narrow and irregular pathways.
In addition, there are frequently social issues compounded by poverty, which means that working in these areas requires a different approach from other parts of the city.
These areas are frequently left out of the mainstream planning process and are likely to be areas where there is a specific need to work more closely with local communities to develop sanitation solutions appropriate and affordable to their needs.
We will focus more closely on the community-led urban environmental sanitation approach in the next module which is designed specifically for this purpose.
In cities throughout the developing world, due to the unplanned growth, space is often at a premium.
Existing sites for waste disposal are already heavily overloaded and traffic congestion means that sites for sludge disposal may be only available at night.
Therefore the availability of space may be a key determining factor on how the sanitation system can be designed for a particular city.
And indeed, no one type of technology will be appropriate for all areas of the city, and the outcome from the application of the Sanitation21 planning approach is likely to lead toward recommendations that on-site sanitation is appropriate for some areas, whereas decentralized, semi-centralized, or centralized sewage will be appropriate for other areas.
A financial comparison of different technologies is a very important part of the planning process.
If we consider different types of sanitation system, each one will have different capital investment requirements, different cost for operation and routine maintenance, and other costs associated with capital maintenance which is involved with larger scale refurbishment costs.
If we feed in this information to a financial analysis on a life cycle assessment we can compare these different options and this as well as some of the other aspects such as availability of land may be the key factors which determine what sanitation system is most appropriate in different situations.
The financial comparison can identify the most cost effective solution and we can use this analysis to identify affordable solutions for different communities.
And also, it may highlight a need for subsidy.
Sources of funding for capital investments can come from many sides.
National and provincial funding is one source, often supported by international finance, development banks, development agencies, and international
NGOs.
This funding can also be used to support municipal development budgets.
In addition to this, for the local level service provision and for household facilities we also need to take into consideration the funding from private sector and from households and communities themselves.
Each of these different service arrangements can utilize a different management option.
At the household level small-scale service providers may be the most appropriate option for de-sludging pits and taking waste away.
But at the neighborhood level, private companies, CBOs and NGOs may be involved in different ways in providing services and also collecting money and regulating the service providers; whereas at the city level utility, public or private or a delegated management arrangement to a private company may be considered to be the best option.
In all of these levels often the interrelationships between these service providers is what's critical for maintaining and sustaining adequate level of sanitation.
There is usually only one way in which a system and its associated management arrangement will work, but unfortunately there are many ways in which it may go wrong.
Therefore, in the planning process we need to consider some of the broader social, political and economic processes.
Here we see a diagram of the enabling environment which shows the various facets that determine the nature of sanitation investment and sanitation service provision.
The city sanitation planning process is very much influenced by national policy and strategy, but it also has a strong interface as we've seen with local level planning activities.
Some of the city sanitation planning will result in proposals for municipal infrastructure which can go directly towards proposals for design and construction, implementation of larger scale systems.
But clearly we see a need for local level planning, where there is a need to engage with communities and design systems which are most appropriate for their needs.
In the next module my colleague 
[Christoff Luty] will focus closely on the local level planning part of the sanitation planning process.
I thank you very much for your attention.
