Welcome back to part two of this chapter.
So chemical shifts are often considered as imperical quantities that escape any attempt to explain them.
But of course, that's not true.
People, and chemists in particular, physicists as well, would like to give an explanation.
And there are in fact a wide variety of explanations.
Some of them are conflicting.
Sometimes they make sense, sometimes they dont.
And one has to be very careful to pick one's way among this minefield of explanations.
But let me give you some of the elements, so you can judge yourself how sound the science is.
So, here we have
Pauling's electronegativity.
We all know there is a series from iodine to Bromine to chlorine to Fluorine, where the electronegativity increases; that is, to say, the electron withdrawing ability.
And it turns out that if we take methyl halides,
Ch3x, where x is one of the above, then it turns out that the chemical shift of the protons of the methyl group follows a particular trend, which is roughly linear with the Pauling definition of electronegativity.
So you might say, the stronger the withdrawal, the larger the chemical shift of the proton that is attached to the methl group that is neighboring to the halide. So far, so good.
This makes sense. I wouldn't use it as a way of determining the electronegativity.
But you could, if you wish.
Now, it turns out that the electronegativity has an effect beyond the neighboring methyl group.
In fact, if we take a chlorine at the end of a long chain-- so this is now one of the halides at the end of a butane molecule.
You can see that the first protons on the neighboring methelyn group are shifted all the way to the left but the second one is affected much less.
The third one is hardly affected at all, and the methyl group is so far away that it has essentially the same chemical shift as the methyl group in a simple propane molecule.
So, this tells you something about the range of this electronegative electron withdrawing effect.
There is an important aspect when one tries to rationalize chemical shifts that sometimes they go hand in hand with the chemist perception of how the molecule really looks like.
And when I say "the chemist perception"
I mean the so-called
"resonance structure".
Take this simple aromatic molecule.
We know that the NO2 group is an electron withdrawing group.
And the organic chemist rationalizes this by saying that some small fraction of this is not in fact as drawn here but that the double bond migrates to the single bond and becomes therefore a double bond, and, concommitantly there is a positive charge that appears here on the neighboring carbon.
And you can use one more step, you can cause this double bond to migrate here and then the positive charge appears in para position with respect to the NO2- group.
Well, these structures are known as resonance structures and they're very familiar to organic chemists because they allow one to rationalize reactivity, where do certain substituents go, and questions like that.
And in fact, these pictures have been developed hand-in-hand with the observation of the proton chemical shifts.
And you see an example here.
Nitrobenzene which are these three molecules here.
Actually there are three different chemical shifts.
There's one that is strongly de-shielded with respect to benzene, that is the one in the ortho position.You can imagine that because the electrons are being withdrawn there is a lack of an electron cloud and therefore it's less shielded, and, likewise in the para position, that is over here there's a similar effect, although it's much less pronounced.
It's a bit paradoxical because in the resonance structures there's really no need to say that the ortho+ is dominant over the para+ but you see that, at least empirically, it turns out that the effect is most pronounced for the ortho and very little for the para.
Meanwhile, according to this argument the proton in the meta position, that's this one here, should not be affected at all.
Well, it is also affected somewhat with respect to benzene but apparently that's a different effect than the resonance effect.
Now, the beauty of this argument is the exact opposite to what you see in aniline.
In aniline we have an electron donating group, so we have the loan pair on the nitrogen here this loan pair can go here, and then this double bond will move into this postiton so that we have an excess charge here.
And in the second step, we can decide to put that charge here and put this one over here so that we now have an excess charge in the para position.
And consequently, you expect the ortho position to be shielded because there are more electrons than there were before.
You de-localize them and therefore it goes toward the right, and the para position would be somewhat less shielded, and the meta position should not be shielded at all but nevertheless, it is somewhat shielded.
You notice that it's not exactly symmetrical.
For example, the para is very close to the ortho here where that's not the case on the left side.
So, that shows that these arguments are essentially qualitative and you should not give them the status of a serious theory just more to guide the intuition.
But chemistry is a great deal about intuition, so there's nothing wrong with using that type of thinking.
Here we have an example of carbon 13 chemical shifts of para carbons in substituted benzenes.
So, with reference to these molecules, we're talking now about the carbon, not the proton, the carbon, that is in para position with respect to the substituent, and now we vary the substituent, so we can put this NH2 here, which is like here, the amine, or, we can put the NO2, like here, the nitro group, but there are all sorts of things in between, and we can use this chemical shift scale here as a measure of the ability of the substituents to donate electrons into the phenol group, or to withdraw them from the same aromatic ring.
So, this is a very nice way of classifying the electronegativity of those groups, and also, to predict the reactivity which, of course, is essential in chemistry.
There is a more exotic example.
In fact this was published many years ago by Ray Freeman,
Ray Freeman was my PHD advisor and Rex Richards was his advisor, so, in a way he is my intellectual grandfather, if I dare say so, and I vividly recommend you look up this publication in the Proceedings of the Royal Society.
It's quite a few years ago, but, nevertheless, of great current interest.
Now, what these people did, they knew that cobalt complexes, for example here, with the nitrile group the ethylene diamine, or the ammonium, and all the others that they have different colors, and different optical transitions.
And these optical transitions are due to the transition-- the crystal fuel splitting between the so-called t2g orbitals and the eg orbitals in the cobalt complex which is in these cases, as always in a hexagonal environment.
And what they found is, they started measuring cobalt 58 chemical shifts.
Something that is not at all common in the literature, but clearly a heroic attempt to discover a new correlation, and they found a wonderful correlation, between the chemical shift of the cobalt and the wavelength in nanometers of the optical transition.
So, this is somewhere in the visible
UV visible light.
Then they said, "Aha, this has something to do with-- this is a contribution to the chemical shift," which they attibuted to what is now known as a paramagnetic contribution to the shift.
They noticed that it's inversely proportional to the parameter delta, which is simply the splitting, the transition frequency of the optical transition, and they also considered that it should be relevent to include an average over R3 where R3 is basically the radius of the size of the electron cloud that is responsible for the chemical shift.
Now this is a really beautiful observation, very interesting, very stimulating, but unfortunately, there are not many molecules that behave in such a clear way, not many examples of this effect.
Now, in the meantime, people have been trying to split contributions to nuclear shielding into different parameters.
The effect that I spoke about at the very beginning of chapter two the one that we find in helium 3 and in xenon 129 which, by the way, is also known as the Lamb shift, is more properly known as a diamagnetic shielding.
So, in diamagnetic shielding the induced magnetic field, induced by the circulation of the electrons, is anti-parallel to the external field.
But we also have situations where the shielding is paramagnetic.
In that case there is a local field which is actually parallel to the external field and therefore adds up to the external field.
Then, there are effects which are due to remote groups, or remote currents, or currents in remote groups, and of course, other sources.
Now, it's very nice to make a list of these, but it's very difficult in practice to split and observe chemical shift into separate contributions.
Now, remember here that the magnitudes of induced diamagnetic and paramagnetic currents can be related to local electron densities, and to electronic excitation energies.
So, this is clearly inspired by the work of Ray Freeman and Rex Richards on cobalt but is not necessarily of universal application.
Some of the most important contributions to chemical shifts are so-called ring-current effects, which are specific to aromatic compounds.
You see in this scheme here this ring here is supposed to represent a benzene ring or, in fact, any aromatic ring.
You see that the induced field, the field induced by the electrons that circulate in this ring is opposite to the external field, and if we could have a proton right in the center of the benzene ring, it would be shielded because it experiences a field that is smaller than the external field.
But in fact, protons in benzene rings as you know, are on the outside of the ring, and therefore, they experience a local magentic field an induced field, which adds to the external field.
And the result of that is that they appear de-shielded.
Now, one way of measuring this effect is comparing benzene, where the chemical shift is about 7.3 ppm with respect to tms with a form here where one of the three double bonds has been reduced by addition of a hydrogen molecule, and consequently there is no possibility for these electrons to run around a circle and they cannot sustain a ring current, and therefore not induce a magnetic dipole that is opposite to the external dipole.
Well, you see immediately that the chemical shift of this proton goes from 7.3 to 5.9 so it has become shielded or less de-shielded, if you prefer.
A more spectacular example here.
This molecule is a rather contrived piece of chemistry, it was made in the days when people were trying to find extremes of the most de-shielded or the most shielded compound and the most important part of it is that this methyl group here is just above the aromatic ring.
This is the aromatic ring, and the methyl group is just above that ring.
And it turns out that it's not just a bit shielded, but it is more shielded than Tetramethylsilane, so it has a negative value, if you wish, to the right of tms in an ordinary proton spectrum plotted on the usual scale.
At the same time, all the protons the aromatic protons, which you find here and there are quite a few of them they are in this range, that is to say they are very far to the left of the spectrum, or strongly de-shielded.
Perhaps a cleaner illustration of this comes from this aniline which has slow inter-conversion of internal and external protons through reorientation, but the basic thing is that because the protons are on the inside of the ring where the current is circulating, they have a negative value of the chemical shift delta which means that they are on the right hand side compared to tms, whereas the other ones here just like in benzene, they are de-shielded and therefore on the left of the spectrum
You notice that one goes form 7.3 to 8.5 or so to 9.28, so this goes more and more pronounced.
Now there are also interesting things that happen if we have triple bonds and other exotic pieces of chemistry but triple bonds are not exotic at all.
In this case we have to worry about something else, and that is about the orientation of the triple bond with respect to the external field.
And this, in fact, introduces a property of chemical shifts which is very important when we do solid state NMR, and that is the chemical shift depends on the orientation of the molecule with respect to the external field.
And it turns out that somewhat against intuition, as far as mine is concerned, if the triple bond is perpendicular to the external field, then there are strong currents within this conjugated by electron system, and the net effect of that is a paramagnetic shift where there is a strong dipole which is parallel to the external field.
And therefore, we have these arrows here representing flux, and you can see that they will affect, for example, the acetylenic protons here and here, where they have a situation which is actually opposite to what happens in, for example, benzene.
But the situation is compounded by the fact that-- the complexity is compounded by the fact that if the triple bond parallel to the field, then we have to draw it this way.
It turns out that these electrons circulate less freely in this situation and therefore, the induced paramagnetic dipole is weaker.
If the dipole were equal here and here and if one then invokes isotropic tumbling of the molecules so they can adopt all possible orientations in space, then there would be no net effect.
But there is an imbalance, you see.
Here the paramagnetic induced dipole is strong and here it is weak.
And therefore, there is no averaging when it tumbles over all possible positions.
This has curious effects.
For example, if we take a famous series, so this is just ethane CH3 CH3.
It is not very far from methane.
And it's on the right hand side, close to 1 ppm.
If we now introduce a double bond, we jump from here to here.
And if we introduce a triple bond, you might think that we go even further.
Well, that's not true in fact, we go back one step, so to speak.
And that is because of the anisotropy of the triple bond of the electron motion with the triple bond.
Such things can be represented in terms of regions of shielding and deshielding.
So we can distinguish such cases where the dipole, the paramagnetic dipole for the parallel position is larger than the dipole for the perpendicular position, in which case we get a distribution of fields like this or the opposite case, where of course we have opposite signs.
Notice that these are drawn on these cones.
In fact these cones are schematic representations of tensars and they look a bit like orbitals.
You may notice that the angle subtendance by these cones is this angle here, we shall refer to that as the magic angle, and in fact it's about
54 degree, and we shall see that if we somehow orient molecules in a solid along that line we get a simplified spectrum that is also the basis of magic angle spinning.
Now there are some implications of these neighboring groups.
We spoke about acetyline.
We spoke about the proton which is attached, the acetylinic proton, but more spectacular effects occur in molecules such as this.
So this is the simple phenantrene where this aromatic proton rosonates at about 8 and something ppm but here it is sort of squeezed very close to the triple bond, and you see it has a massive affect of nearly 2 ppm, further deshielded because of the anisotropy of the neighboring group.
This is now the neighboring group, and it has an affect on the chemical shift which of course, does not occur if the triple bond is absent.
So this is deshielding due to magnetic anisotropy.
Now there are some things which are perhaps more important to the chemist and here we see a case of deshielding due to hydrogen bonding.
Hydrogen bonding, of course, is essential in chemistry and also in biology.
Remember that if we think of double stranded DNA, the two strands are held together by very, very weak interactions called hydrogen bonds.
It is only because there are so many of them that these two strands hold together.
So, characterizing hydrogen bonds is actually quite important in chemistry.
And here we see an example, or two examples, actually; we see that the proton here, which is sort of sharing it's attention between two oxygens- I'm not saying it's symmetrically distributed.
There's a proper bond to this oxygen and a weaker bond to that oxygen- but you see that the electron cloud is very weak and very diminished around that hydrogen, and therefore it is very much deshielded, and in fact its chemical shift is 11 and something ppm.
A more simple example here, we see that this hydrogen really doesn't know where it wants to go, because the whole molecule can be redrawn the double bonds can hop around, and the net effect is that this hydrogen is almost bare.
There are almost no electrons to shield it, and therefore it turns out very heavily deshielded because there are no electrons to shield it.
And that, of course, is characteristic of such hydrogen bonds.
And as I said, we find similar things in DNA, deoxyribonucleic acids, and also in RNAs which are very popular today to study by Bio-NMR.
Now, there's another picture which
I think is very instructive, and I must say that Peter Hall did a tremendous job in selecting good examples, and this is the one of ethanol.
Now ethanol, we all know, and some of us know too well, which I can write it like this, and I give it a little bend because next to it, I shall be drawing another ethanol molecule, very similar structure but just drawn head to tail.
And this is known as an ethanol dimer.
And it turns out that the dimer holds together with these two hydrogen bonds.
And because there are these intermolecular hydrogen bonds, the electron density around each of these two hydrogens is very weak, very diminished and we are, in effect, in a position similar to this, and so the chemical shift of the hydrogen is very much to the left.
Or, it's very deshielded.
Well, that's why in ordinary ethanol if we have one mole of ethanol in a product solvent such as tetrachlorocarbon then we have the OH, which as you can see, appears about near 5 and something ppm.
But, as we dilute the ethanol to a tenth of a mole per liter to a hundredths to a thousandths, we see that the OH resonance moves to the right.
And that is because, as we dilute we can break up this dimer so that it falls apart into monomers.
And because the solvent here, the product solvent is unable of making any hydrogen bonds with either of these monomers, the hydrogen is less deplenished or its environment is less depleted of electrons and therefore it's more shielded, and as you can see it moves toward lower ppm values, lower chemical shifts.
Now, you will notice that this is not an experimental spectrum.
In fact there's no reference given to it either in the book.
And the reason is that it's not so easy to observe this hydrogen because the hydrogen will also exchange by chemical exchange, and therefore, the very least that can happen is that it would be very broad,
And sometimes it is also at a different chemical shift.
That depends on the entire structure.
But it's an interesting principle, and the demonstration is very nicely done.
Now, let me take you to one of the last examples, and this is unpaired electrons.
There are lots of systems in organic chemistry, where we have free electrons or unpaired electrons.
In organic chemistry we call them radicals in metals we don't call them radicals.
Simply, they have electrons that are not paired up in pairs in individual orbitals.
Iron is a good example of an atom, of a metal, that often has unpaired electrons.
Zinc, on the other hand, has an even number of electrons that are nicely paired up.
So, what you see here is a complex spectra these are proton NMR spectra of complexes such as this where the four nitrogens hold the metal ion in the middle,
And this metal can be either zinc or iron.
And what we actually observe is the chemical shifts of this Hx here and of the Hy.
As you go around the ring you will see there's really only two chemical shifts- they alternate, so there's two Hx's, an Hy--
But that's not important here.
The important part is that if we have zinc in the center, then it's not paramagnetic.
There are no free electrons, and we have a simple case where all these are aromatic protons and they resonate somewhere between 8 and 9 ppm, which is fine, nothing abnormal.
But, if we replace the zinc by iron-
Iron 2 I believe it's in this case- then, we see tremendous change.
They are dramatically shielded, one could say, or shifted towards the right hand side in this scale.
And X and Y no longer similar.
The near degeneracy that we have in the zinc case is now lifted.
Now this is due the coupling between the free electrons and these protons.
A long range coupling which in fact is known as hyperfine coupling and which leads to a shift because the distribution of the polarization between alpha and beta states for an electron is not 50/50 but it's displaced towards the lowest energy state following the Boltzmann rule.
And in fact it's the rapid transitions between electrons in the alpha and the beta state which give rise to an average chemical shift, if you will, or an average position of the proton lines which depend on the environment.
So, to conclude this second chapter of Peter Hall's little book, let's look at the summary that the author has put together at the end of the chapter.
First of all, we notice that nuclei such as protons, are embedded in molecules, and that that they may have slightly different NMR frequencies depending on the environment, an effect that is known as the chemical shift.
Such effects occur not only for protons, but also for carbon 13, nitrogen 15 phosphorus 31, and depending on the sort of system that we're looking at silicon 29, and many other nuclei in the periodic table.
Chemical shifts arise from induced electronic currents which can either shield or deshield the nuclei from the applied magnetic field.
The chemical shift parameter delta is used to quantify the extent, the degree, of nuclear shielding or deshielding with respect to a conventional reference, sometimes detramethylsiline for protons and carbon and other nuclei have different standards, of course.
So, the magnitudes of induced diamagnetic and paramagnetic currents can be related to local electron densities and electronic excitation energies.
Chemical shifts can often be understood by considering the effects of electron donating and electron withdrawing groups by looking at the effects of induced currents in neighboring groups such as triple bonds or aromatic rings, looking at charged or polar groups at the role of hydrogen bonds and of unpaired electrons which have hyperfine couplings to the nuclei that we are looking at.
Chemical shifts distinguish nuclei in different environments in molecules and therefore give information both on the molecular identity and on the molecular structure.
