Hello, and welcome to the second module in our course on implementation research.
In the first module you learned about the overview of what implementation research is about.
When we're doing implementation research we will be trying to decide on what important issues need to be studied, what interventions need to be tried.
And so we need a needs assessment to learn about, what's going on with the programmes in our environment so that we can design good implementation research.
In this module I'll be joined with Uche Amazigo, who is right now a Professor at the Nnamdi Azkiwe University in Nigeria.
She was formerly the Director of the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control. And I'm Bill Brieger,
Professor at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, the International Health Department.
So thank you for joining us.
One thing to remember about implementation research is that it's done in a context.
And from the diagram, we can see that the context includes the outer setting, the broader social, political and economic environment in which our programmes operate.
We have our inner setting, which includes all of the aspects of the service delivery organization and the people that they serve.
We then of course, are concerned about the people themselves who they are, the individuals involved, including the beneficiaries, policy makers, programme implementers.
And finally we have a process that we go about.
Again, even though this is not like basic laboratory research, we still have to go through steps in an orderly way so that we know that the product we get out of the research is valid.
And, of course, one of the first steps as we're going to be talking about in this module is collecting information that we need to make decisions about the kind of implementation that we're going to do.
Here we see an example of the outer setting, the economic context.
Here we have a market in a small town in Nigeria.
But, again, people earn their living by farming.
They may be a poor community, and as you recall, we're doing our modules about the infectious diseases of poverty.
So we do need to consider those factors when we are designing interventions.
We want to make sure that they are adapted to that local environment, where the programme is being carried out.
We recognize, of course, there are national as well as global policies that influence how the programme is carried out.
Funding, of course, comes from national level, from Ministries of Health, international level through things like the Global Fund.
So this again, is part of the broader environment.
And then there's the broader policy or legal environment that makes it possible to deliver services, that sets the guidance, the  technical guidance also, of how we deliver our programmes.
Again, one thing we're concerned about from the external environment, whether it's a national level or the global level, is that our programmes are held accountable.
If funding is being provided, there is this accountability and so that influences the evaluation.
And again, what we're looking for is are we reaching our targets, which is part of the evaluation.
The inner setting, as we can see here a small health center in Southeastern Nigeria, where women can come for antenatal care, where they can bring children for vaccinations.
People who have common illnesses can come for treatment.
And, if we're fortunate, we can have staff there who reach out and train community health workers to extend access to services.
So what we're concerned about is what goes on in these service delivery settings.
Inside, you know, the personnel, the resources they have, and again, the interaction with the community and the beneficiaries.
Each organization has its own culture, the way people do things, the way they interact with each other, things that they value, and we want to take that into account when we're designing appropriate implementation research.
So, again, our needs assessment is to learn about these various factors.
We want to be sure that in the organization itself that the people from the leadership to the frontline implementers are ready to change, are willing to change in order to improve their service delivery.
And we're also concerned about the clients, the consumers, the community members, the beneficiaries, however you want to call them.
But again, if we do not offer a service that they appreciate or that they have access to, then we will still not be reaching our targets.
So we definitely want to look carefully at this and gather information.
It's important to stress that implementation research happens in a real-life setting, under real-life conditions within the routine delivery of services
Again, this may be a service to provide intermittent preventive treatment of malaria for pregnant women, or it may be at the community level where we're doing community case management for common childhood illnesses.
But we are looking at real-life programmes in real-life settings to find out what works and trying new interventions to make things work better, to give access to more people.
So we want to take into account the prevailing conditions but again, as we said, from the external environment the political, social, economic, the local culture and adapt programmes to fit this environment.
Now, in some research we're worried about external validity but if we're trying to do implementation research to improve the delivery of services in a particular setting we want it to actually work in that setting.
So this is our challenge: to be real-life.
Again, when we're talking about who is doing this yes, there maybe a core team of researchers but they don't operate alone.
We need involvement for all of those who are designing managing, and using the programmes.
Again, whether this might be a programme for distributing ivermectin to prevent river blindness or onchocerciasis.
Whether this is a programme to distribute bed nets to prevent lymphatic filariasis or malaria, we want to bring in all parties to find out what is working, what is not working, and how we can design and try something better.
So again, getting information from various sources to learn about this.
So what we want to do in this module is to facilitate your learning about how do you analyze the context that you're going to be working in and researching in?
How do you engage all the stakeholders, from the policy makers to the community members so that the programme is realistic for all of their needs?
We want to get everyone's opinion about what are the bottlenecks that maybe affecting our current interventions.
And then we want to get people's ideas and help design an intervention that we can test through implementation research.
This is the key issue, that unless we get good information we won't have a good design to test.
Again, we cannot stress too often the need to involve all of the stakeholders, all of the key parties from the policy makers, programme managers, implementing staff, frontline health workers, community health workers, community leaders, community organizations, and of course, the beneficiaries themselves.
So all of these people need to be involved in this process as we have said.
We also, again, recognize that this process or the design of the intervention is an issue of strategies.
Now we assume at the beginning of any programme that the people coming together to design that programme have a strategy, have a way of going about things.
Have a rationale that they have figured out what kind of activities they will do, and what resources they will need.
These strategies should be planned and they should be updated regularly.
But there may be some unplanned things happening.
There maybe changes in the funding level.
There maybe changes in community response.
And we may find that people have adapted or modified the original strategy.
We want to learn all of these things about the process of the existing programmes and take that into account in designing new interventions, and again be very specific when we do that, what are the steps and processes that we're hoping to test in this new approach?
One of the big challenges that we will be looking at when we're gathering information about existing programmes, in order to design new interventions is whether things are working?
Whether we're reaching our targets?
Let's look at the example of malaria.
The Roll Back Malaria Partnership bringing together public sector, private sector, international organizations, many, many partners to try to achieve the goal of bringing down deaths from malaria and hopefully eventually eliminating it.
So this partnership was formed in '98.
In the year 2000, the African Heads of State and the Ministers for Health and related partners, NGOs, all gathered in Abuja and set targets for what all countries wanted to achieve by the year 2010.
And that was basically a figure of 80 percent.
They wanted to be sure that 80 percent of particularly vulnerable people like children under 5, or pregnant women were sleeping under bed nets
They wanted to make sure that 80 percent of people when they got sick from malaria received the correct treatment, in a timely manner within 24 hours.
They wanted to make sure that 80 percent of pregnant women got intermittent preventive treatment through their antenatal care.
These targets were revised upwards a little bit.
Some of the donors said let's aim for 85 percent.
And then around 2009, the United Nations generally started talking about universal health coverage.
And meaning that everybody should be protected by bed nets.
Everybody should get appropriate malaria treatment.
Well, let's just look at the question of the 80 percent, because that's, you know, our first challenge.
So, from 2000 to 2010, was it possible for countries to meet that target given the intervention designs that they had?
And those designs were largely through the existing health services.
Distributing them at the services at clinics, the bed nets.
There would be campaigns also for the bed nets.
So the question is, did these interventions work?
So the challenge we had is that we didn't really achieve our full coverage, because what we were hoping is that if we had achieved full coverage  by 2010, and sustained that, the deaths would really, seriously drop.
We can see here information that was available around this 2010 target year, maybe 2009, 2011, but basically around that time information was available through a number of sources that we'll talk about in a later chapter.
This particular source is included in demographic and health surveys,
National Health Information systems, but what we saw is that for one of the targets, pregnant women sleeping under bed nets every night, no place achieved the 80 percent goal.
It was really a big challenge. And nobody could make it.
We found similarly that the same thing for intermittent preventive treatment, for pregnant women.
In fact, as we're recording now in 2016, that goal still has not been met.
So there are some challenges, we are finding that mortality did drop because we did increase the number of people who had access to these preventive services, and increased the number of people who got appropriate treatment and didn't die.
But we didn't achieve zero mortality by 2015, which as some of you may recall, is also the year where the Millennium Development Goals were to be achieved, including those things related to malaria.
So at any rate, it's not just enough to say, oh, we're sorry we didn't make that target, we want to find out why.
And we want to plan new ways to reach people, to give them access to these services, so that we can achieve targets.
So this is, you know, our major goal, can we learn?
And of course, just from this information, we've learned that we didn't achieve the goal but we need to gather more information to find out why and figure out what we can do better.
One way of understanding programmes and achievements, is the idea of programme stages.
Many of our programmes to control infectious diseases of poverty have stages.
We start off where the programmeis just being implemented and we need to scale up.
This was what the period of 2000 to 2010 was supposed to be for many of the malaria interventions, scaling up, so we achieved that 80 percent, or more, hopefully more.
The idea then was sustained control so that you could keep that level of coverage maintained until 2015.
If that had happened, we would have seen major drops, we probably would have seen zero malaria deaths which had been the goal.
Again, as we've mentioned, we hadn't achieved that.
If we had achieved that, we would have gotten to the level of what they call pre-elimination, where when you send people for testing for malaria, when you suspect that you find that less than 5 percent of them with fevers actually have malaria.
So that means other diseases are affecting people but malaria has dropped.
At that point, we want to redesign, rethink reorient our programme.
And implementation research is very much important in that process, because this new orientation at that stage would require better surveillance, better case detection, better response to outbreaks.
So we need to have interventions that will do that.
If we're successful in maintaining that and keep bringing down the number of cases, then we will get to the phase of malaria elimination where there would be less than a one per thousand people ultimately to the point where there are no cases acquired locally.
There maybe a few people crossing the border as they do, and bringing it in but we try to catch them quickly.
So by that point, if we have no malaria cases occurring we're very vigilant, we have the right interventions to detect cases in case anything happens.
This happened with the Guinea worm, they actually set rewards for people who could find a Guinea worm.
And, actually, no one did but it certainly kept people aware and that was an interesting intervention.
So ultimately, if we can prevent transmission and the re-introduction from other countries for 3 years, WHO could certify a country as being free of malaria.
So that's an ultimate goal.
At this point, I'm going to turn the floor over to Uche Amazigo, who will talk to us about some of the practical reasons why we may have missed our targets.
There are several reasons why programme targets are missed or programmes are unable to scale up.
I shall present important stakeholders that provide useful information in implementation research to understand programme challenges.
As Bill explained earlier, health providers missed the target for malaria control, despite the Abuja declaration by the African Heads of States and the commitments of donors and countries.
Through needs assessment, malaria programmes can determine the reasons they could not meet their targets for the different settings.
For instance, programmes can miss targets because of poor supervision by health workers or inadequate investment in monitoring programme activities.
I mean lack of follow up can lead to non-use or misuse of commodities.
As you can see in the slide, insecticide treated bed net is being used by children for a football goal post in this community.
Inadequate investment in annual health education of beneficiaries can lead to misuse of commodities.
Needs assessments by programmes should find out why these things happen.
Stock-outs from poor planning has in various settings led to implementation problem and health programmes not achieving their goals.
Clinic experiences also offer insight into programme implementation problems.
For example, antenatal clinics may not be reaching all clients with malaria prevention and de-worming medicines.
Needs assessment for implementation research will help the research team to respond to such questions as:
Do women attend late or miss appointments?
Do health staff not order enough medicines and supplies in a timely manner?
Do health staff not record all services delivered?
Implementation research requires also gathering appropriate data from programme beneficiaries: the communities, schools, work sites and others utilizing the programme in order to understand clients’perception of the programme,
Iimplementation changes or the adaptations health providers and programme managers need to make.
Community members may not adhere to annual ivermectin doses because the programme staff delivered ivermectin at the collection point after the members of the community had moved to their farmlands.
This has happened in some sites.
Programmes that aim to control and eliminate infectious diseases of poverty, do not work only within the health sector.
The schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminth control programmes are primarily school-based.
These diseases affect attendance, retention, completion and learning ability of school age children in many countries.
To design a better way of scaling of these programmes, and improving coverage in local settings it is important to include schools in the needs assessment.
Finally, do not forget that infectious diseases of poverty also impact on the ability of workers to function in their jobs whether these be in farming, construction, commerce, or clerical employment.
Worksites and schools must be included, considered, in designing needs assessments for those programmes that include these groups as beneficiaries.
In designing new programmes or to better understand implementation problems of a public health programme not reaching its goal, we need to pay attention to settings and context.
Thank you for listening and please join us for Chapter 2.
