Welcome to our second chapter in our module on needs assessment for implementation research. Uche and I will be sharing with you some of our experiences in gathering information to plan this research so we hope you enjoy this session.
Like all research there are 3 basic methods for gathering information so this doesn't differ for implementation research.
We're concerned about reviewing documents.
Most programmes that we are going to be studying, that we're going to be designing are built on programmes that have been implemented already.
There may be gaps, there may be problems but there are always reports and documents to tell us how the programme has done, where it's done well, where it has challenges and gaps and problems.
So we need to collect existing documents to help us understand what's going on and plan for new interventions that may help the programme work better.
We're also concerned about talking with people.
We have many ways of doing that but we're concerned about talking with the beneficiaries of the programme, the people who have taken part in it; who have opinions about whether the service has been good for them or not. We're also interested in talking to people who'd never use the service to find out more about their opinions and we can do this in a number of ways.
And finally we're interested in gathering information through observing.
We will go to the place where the service is being offered.
We'll see what's happening there. We'll go to the community where there are community interventions being delivered and see what's happening
So together as a team we will work together and find out what is happening with this particular programme. We're going to be looking at who is affected. Are we reaching the right people or not?
And why is this programme succeeding or not?
In other words why we might need to develop and try a new intervention. The first big question we have is with documents, what can they tell us?
We have a picture here of the malaria indicator survey that is from Malawi. The people that do our demographic and health surveys for example have the malaria information survey. They do HIV surveys but the idea of these surveys is at a national level we can learn about people who use and don't use particular services.
And hopefully be able to distinguish different segments of the population.
Generally what we're concerned about in these documents is the performance of the programme. Is it meeting its objectives?
Is it meeting its goals? Is it meeting its targets?
Hopefully the reports, some of them, will give us information on reasons why that they may not have succeeded, again giving us ideas for new interventions.
It'll tell us funding gaps. One of the biggest challenges of course in delivering the programmes is not having enough funds or the funds not arriving on time. We want to learn something about the stakeholder commitment; all those people involved: the policy makers, the programme managers, other people.
Are they really committed to implementing this programme?
And finally, summing all this up, we'll see specific areas for improving the programme that can give us ideas for implementation research. Again, we're basically interested in gathering information that will help us design better programmes.
Again as we mentioned yesterday, we're talking about in a specific locality so that the implementation research is very helpful to improving programme access, programme performance in a particular context.
Here we can see some examples of the major documents that we may run across. These are particularly related to the major sources of funding whether it is international agencies or government agencies. We've talked a bit about the global fund. The Global Fund gives money for malaria, TB and HIV programmes and they provide reports back to countries at least every 6 months about the progress being made. Those reports are geared toward looking at the targets the country set so we'll see some examples of how progress reports can help us understand where programmes need to improve. We've talked about again, the demographic and health survey and its related surveys, the malaria indicator survey.
This gives us a population basis for understanding access and utilisation of services, the uptake of interventions, whether it's intermittent preventative treatment for malaria by pregnant women; whether pregnant women even attend antenatal care so we can get good information.
This is done maybe every 2-3 years alternating between the malaria survey and the demographic and health survey so it's not done that often. What we can find in real time is information from our national health management information system.
Back to this question of the antenatal clinic, they have to provide monthly data on the number of women who came for 1,2,3 antenatal visits. Of those who registered they want to say who received the intermittent preventative treatment
1,2,3 or more times. They want to record and report the number of women who were given an insecticide treated bed net so this is ongoing data that can help us understand whether we're achieving programme goals or not.
We also have published and unpublished literature about programmes. University and Ministry of Health research institutes do quite a lot of studies about these common issues and these reports can help us understand where we have gaps, where we have successes.
Finally, again from the ordinary supervision processes in the Ministry of Health, we have data on quality assurance or quality performance by health workers and by the overall service and that can point us in the direction of needs for better interventions or improving interventions and therefore our implementation research.
In addition to these more global or national type of reports and documents we do recognize that each programme within a country will generate its own reports.
We have reports that come in especially after bed net distribution campaigns on utilization of the bed nets.
We have reports from the programme that controls onchocerciasis in a country about the uptake of ivermectin that's used to control the disease. We have reports on the proportion of eligible people that take it, the proportion of eligible communities so those specific programmereports are available.
We, in some cases communities are actively involved in monitoring their health programmes and they develop their own simple reporting system. We may need to visit those communities to see those reports but it's important to learn how things are functioning on the ground. Most agencies, most NGOs have annual performance reports and it's important to read these to see in the agency's own eyes where they think they're doing well, what they want to do to improve.
As we said before there is university based research but also university students have projects to do and they go out in the field and do these projects and write them up so we do need to be in touch with the different departments in the medical school or the social sciences who may go out and collect information.
These student reports would be available for us to look at and learn from.
Another thing too is that even though we may be doing a programmeon malaria we can learn from other programmes and the example of the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control is a good one to think about other programmes learning from.
Way back in 1978 the Alma-Ata Declaration stressed the importance of village health workers, community health workers, but this was not followed through. Eventually the African Programme for
Onchocerciasis came along and developed something called community directed treatment with ivermectin where the community took charge of annual distribution of its own ivermectin in a way that it wanted to do it itself and of course kept its records and reported back. This programme became quite successful throughout up to now I think about 18 countries, endemic countries in Africa and people were watching this.
We hadn't had information on the side, thatother programmes whether in agriculture, whether other disease control programmes, immunization programmes were latching on to this and so later, implementation research was done to see if we could systematically add on things like distribution of bed nets, distribution of community-based treatment for malaria, distribution and community- based delivery of vitamin A, observation of TB; directly observe treatment in the village.
These were some of the things that were adapted as we went along.
The Lymphatic Filariasis Programme also adapted the CDTi model.
So yes, we can read reports and learn and adapt those to other programmes.
We had mentioned Global Fund earlier and just to be sure that we know what these progress reports look like, I anonymously extracted one of these for you to see but like I said these come out every 6 months and you can see that the country has set its own targets.
For example the level 1 target: people trained.
They had set a target for the period of over 8000 people to be trained in anti-malarial treatment; health workers, community volunteers etc. and as you can see in the reporting period they achieved only about a third of their goal. Now sometimes this is a bit frightening but the Global Fund does provide funding for people to do implementation research to learn how to improve their programme.
This should be an activity that spurs people on to try to improve what they're doing. We see also here that in terms of the number of adults in this case who received the appropriate malaria treatment, they had a target of 9 million and again they reached less than a third of the people.
This should tell them are we delivering this in the right way?
Can we design a better implementation process?
Again this type of data from reports can guide us.
Here is an extract from a malaria information or demographic and health survey report to let us know about the achievements.
We know that targets have been set for example for malaria control.
They were set back in the year 2000 at the Abuja Declaration for achieving by 2010 80% coverage of all these interventions.
Here we can see interventions like sleeping under a bed net for both children and pregnant women.
So basically we can see that the percentage that was achieved either sleeping under a treated net or any net was very low for both the pregnant women and the children.
This should raise questions in our mind, why is it?
Why are we not reaching people? And so again, opportunities to learn so that we can plan implementation research.
From our health information system; as I said before we get reports on a regular basis and so you can summarize those for a certain period. Here we have information from
3 major districts in Burkina Faso for 2015.
We can see that for reaching pregnant women with the first dose and this again is based on the denominator of the number of women who registered for ANC in the first place which was relatively high in that country so they reached 82% with the first dose. They're doing pretty good with the second dose;
79%. Not much of a drop off but with this new introduction of a third dose, they only reached about half of the people who registered.
This tells them, okay what are we going to do about this?
How are we going to improve the delivery of IPTp3?
What interventions do we need?
We mentioned the issue of quality assurance; performance quality and here we see the graph showing observations with a checklist of community health workers who are performing case management tasks in the village; malaria, pneumonia, diarrhea.
There were 3 things that were being recorded and summarized:
Did the community health worker take a good history and check for example, for temperature of the child?
Did the community health worker actually perform a rapid diagnostic test for those who were suspected of malaria?
And did the community health worker perform the correct case management procedures for whatever the condition was.
As we said malaria, pneumonia, diarrhea or in case of unknown they would be expected to refer.
So, over the 5 rounds which occurred about once a quarter, we can see general improvement but what we can see is that out of all of the 3 skill areas for these community health workers the area of history taking in examination was the poorest.
It's that history taking that leads us to want to do a test, know what illness we're managing. We want to think about why is this? Why is this history taking difficult?
They've improved other areas, what can we do about this?
Of course we have performance information from health workers in clinics and other places, so observing health workers is an important source of information for our implementation research needs assessment.
Okay, another thing we need to consider is that health has impacts on other sectors of society so we can learn about implementation research needs in other places such as schools.
A number of interventions have been done to improve school health and the health of children affected by the infectious diseases of poverty. One study that we see here used children to report on whether bed nets were used at home.
So the school provides a window into the community.
And so the information that was gathered here was found to be comparable to what could be gathered through a community survey and they realized that schools were a great place to gather information about health not just of the children but of the community.
One thing of course is that schools keep records on attendance.
They keep records on people who drop out and so we can learn from those records especially if the teachers have recorded the reasons for absences.
In a project in Western Kenya that looked at school days missed they could see that malaria was a major suspected cause of these children being absent. Then the question is what kind of interventions might be appropriate based in the school and for the children themselves or based in the school but reaching out into the community.
By looking at these other sectors like education, we can get ideas of improving community health generally.
Finally we get a lot of information from worksites.
Now in many of the countries where we work a lot of the worksites are informal. You may have a sawmill somewhere.
You have farmers. You may have auto-mechanics. And so they're not like a big industry that keeps records but of course you still do have records from places like
Soft drink bottling factories, there’re assembly plants for different kinds of machines. There are the more white collar jobs like working in a bank, accountancy so there are records about absences. In many countries you'll find that malaria is a major source of absenteeism and also if it's a company they probably have a health plan and they pay for it so they want to know what is happening to their workers.
Their records would be fairly good. A study that was done in
Kenya and Nigeria did go to the factories, did go to the worksites, did talk to workers about their experiences and as you can see this study reported some of the information about malaria in particular and seeing that yes, adults perceive themselves as having malaria quite a lot. They did perceive themselves as missing workdays which is important for them if they're on a daily salary; it's important for their family but also not only are children missing work but parents, especially mothers and caregivers would miss work to take care of the sick child.
This is the kind of thing that we can learn from the workplace.
Again, the workplace is not a health delivery site per se but it certainly has implications because the workers live in the community, they get sick but also there are records that we can use to find out. And can we design interventions that are appropriate for workers and in worksites?
At this point I'm going to turn the talk over to Uche and she'll take us through the sections on interviews and talking with people and in addition, to observational work.
So thank you.
I will continue from where Bill stopped to mention other data sources necessary and often used to determine implementation research needs. From all surveys, with questionnaires, among clients, talking with people is important.
The clients include beneficiaries of the programme; men, women youths, school children, teachers, community leaders and members. Depending on the programme formal surveys could include also health workers or even patent medicine dealers. Why not?
People have experiences and opinions to share whether they are literate or not. People who use services of a programme have views about what they like and what they do not like about that programme. People who do not use services can give us information about access problems or barriers.
Remember in Module 1 Professor Oladele Akogun and Dr Hans Remme drew our attention to access to medicines and commodities being an implementation problem.
Therefore listening to and documenting the experiences and opinions of people is an appropriate data source for diseases that affect the poor.
For example, through surveys and by documenting the experiences and opinions of beneficiaries of ivermectin drug distribution programmes in 2 countries after 8 years of treatment we learned that in communities being male, being above 24 years old or belonging to a major ethnic group are factors associated with better compliance to ivermectin treatment.
Another useful source of data is to observe programmes in action in real life. For example, observations in service delivery points, health worker performance checklists, and availability of supplies and materials, observations of the physical environment of the programme facility, client turnout and comfort, quality of record keeping, waiting time; these are all important. In a 10 country study end-users of health facilities, in particular, women attending health clinics reported that attitude of health staff and waiting time were their major concerns.
Checklists can be used by clinics and community health workers for self-study, reflection and planning improvements.
So observing programmes is important.
I’lllike to end this chapter with reference to 2 other sources of data that have proven very useful in implementation research.
These are observations in the community on health related conditions, community level service delivery and observing how people use interventions commodities such as insecticide treated bed nets.
We can learn also from print and electronic media about programme implementation bottlenecks, gaps and successes. The press may not provide detailed statistics but it does highlight issues of concerns to the community members policy makers and programmemanagers.
This is another data source for implementation research.
Thank you and please join us to view the next chapter.
