Hello and welcome to our third chapter in module 2.
In our previous chapter we looked at different ways of gathering information about our programmes.
About the context in which they are operating in.
About how people are accessing and using them so that we could take this information and carry out the next step, which we'll discuss here, in terms of how do you formulate a question.
Basically the questions are:
"What needs to be changed?" and "What kind of intervention can achieve that?"
So we'll look at some of the potential implementation research questions that a group might address.
We see here that there are 2 kinds of questions that you can address in implementation research.
And again we're trying to get this information both in the clinic, in the community, in schools, in work sites.
You can see here, we have a supervisory staff going out to visit the village health worker, looking at the register she has, so they've gathered information directly from the person who is providing community case management.
So we want to take the information we've collected by looking at 2 issues.
One,
What are the key programme challenges that we found?
What are the gaps? What needs to be addressed?
What are we doing not as well as we could?
What new ideas do we have for intervention?
And then the second, what are the possible interventions?
If, for example, the community health workers are having difficulty keeping records can we do an intervention that looks at a different kind of record-keeping format?
We tried something like this some years ago for keeping record of the number of people who received the ivermectin treatments.
And we tried 3 different things.
We tried a tally sheet, because some of our village health workers were not well-educated.
Tally sheet.
We tried a process of putting little stones in different colored bags.
And then we used the existing record form that had come from the programme.
So these are some examples of how you use your information to raise a question:
What would be the best intervention to improve the quality of record keeping by our community volunteers?
We had talked earlier about programmes moving through different stages.
We talked about the malaria programme where we talked about scaling up, sustaining, trying to get to pre-elimination.
And so, one of the problems that we've come across as we've talked about before is it is difficult to sustain the coverage, the proportion of people sleeping under these bed nets.
The nets were supposed to be long lasting
Actually, they're good for about 3 years or 2 years.
The question is, how do we ensure that after those 2 years people get nets?
But even more importantly, how do they use them?
You've seen some examples in the previous chapter of creative utilizations of the bed nets.
And we want to make sure that first and foremost people are taken care of before fish and goats and plants are taken care of.
So in terms of of using the nets, an important IR question could be
"Is there a better way to do health education, health communication, social behavioural change communication, that will ensure that people are using their nets?"
One of the things we discovered after a mass distribution in one of our countries, is that there was no follow up.
They had trained village volunteers to go out and calculate the number of people living in the village and giving them vouchers, but they didn't train them to follow up to make sure people knew how to hang the net in their particular house, the importance of sleeping under the net
So possibly, an IR question is,
"How can we develop a communication approach that will increase the likelihood of people sleeping under nets?"
So again, using our findings and trying to develop questions for better interventions that can be tested.
We've discovered with another infectious disease of poverty, lymphatic filariasis that we do have stages.
There are approximately 7 to 10 years of intervention for mass drug administration to control the disease.
But again, you don't want to stop control completely until you know that you have really brought down the incidence of the disease.
Then you need to do a various kinds of assessments.
Now these surveys, these assessments are not cheap.
So you don't want to do it prematurely.
So some researchers have said, Okay. Can we come up with new ways of getting information on compliance, you know, with the drugs, with the ivermectin and albendazole in Africa?
Can we find out if people are actually taking these drugs?
And are enough people taking it to bring down the incidence of the disease before we actually do a mass survey?
So what kind of ways of finding out from the health workers, from the communities, you know, can we use?
Can we design an intervention that will have real-time information collection to help us inform our programme when to stop.
So this is another example of a question of, you know, how are we doing? and in intervention,
"Can we collect information in real-time better?"
There are a number of questions here that we can think about very briefly.
Some of you may have experienced these.
Hopefully these ideas will make you think of some of the challenges that occur in your own environment.
We have a challenge that we've seen with malaria intervention coverage being low.
One option is looking at community distribution: community volunteers providing intermittent preventive treatment for pregnant women.
There have been pros and cons discussed but we will not know if this is a reasonable and safe intervention until we pilot test it.
So we need to raise questions about is there a community component to the antenatal care delivery.
Can we have a community clinic partnership to improve the delivery of this IPT?
One of the biggest challenges that all health services face, again you saw this in the last module, is stock-out.
And sometimes clinics don't receive enough stock for themselves, let alone to distribute to community health workers for community-case management.
So the question is,
Is there a better way, more effective way, an intervention that could improve the availability of these drugs and other commodities to address community case management?
Is there a role for private sector?
Is there a role for revolving funds?
What could be done?
So we need to raise these kinds of intervention ideas as questions for implementation research.
Again, we find in some cases, that community health workers have been taught to recognize malaria by signs and symptoms.
But we know that not all cases of fever are malaria.
And we know that many people enjoy the service of the community health worker since it improves access, it's very convenient.
So the question is,
Can we train, and can they effectively do rapid diagnostic tests for malaria at the village level?
Okay. So an intervention to test this out would be in order.
So again our goal is to increase our coverage of appropriate care.
Let's say that we, again, we've been looking at ivermectin.
This is a programme that started with mass distribution through community effort in 1995, the founding of the African Programme, for Onchocerciasis Control, and it's been estimated that if coverage can be maintained, at least 65% of eligible people up till...for at least 20-some years, that we might be able to eliminate transmission of the disease.
There are a lot of ifs there but this is a question.
But sometimes, and hopefully by the early 2020s, we might achieve that goal.
But, if people have been taking this drug every year, and for some reason the coverage drops, less people take it.
You know, is it because they're tired of taking it?
Is it because of supplies?
What are the reasons?
But we need to think,
Okay, we've been working with our communities to distribute this drug, is there any way we can tweak or improve on that community distribution to make it better?
So that would be another example of an implementation research question.
We had some data, that we talked about before, from our health information system, and we show that while we've increased over the years the number of women who got their second dose of IPT, what has happened is that now that we've introduced 3 or more doses we have the challenge of living up to that new target.
And although these data show that in, I think it was Burkina Faso, that, yes, that once IPT3 was introduced it has been taken up by more women.
But we also recognize that it is nowhere near these targets of 80% or more.
So what can we do?
First, are there interventions at the clinic that can be done?
Is there a special training that nurses could have to help them recognize and record the need for treatment of the third dose?
Is there anything they could do to improve their interviewing skills to identify women who need a third dose?
Is there anything they could do to encourage women to come back for antenatal care, you know, for the requisite number of times so that they get their full dose?
And as we mentioned before, is there a role for the community?
In some places, a community intervention has been designed where the community mobilizes and educates mothers and others, testing out whether the community can help deliver these additional doses.
So again our information raises the question that we can think about together as we said earlier, with all of our stakeholders come up with a locally relevant design, locally relevant intervention that can be tested through implementation research.
We talked about our various surveys.
Our demographic and health surveys.
Our malaria indicator surveys.
And we want to use that information to guide us to think about improving programmes, designing new interventions.
So we can see that from this survey that there was increase in the number of children who had been tested, had a blood test, whether it was RDT or microscopy, but who had a test, so that number has been slowly increasing.
Now the question is, the goal is not just testing anybody who has malaria because we don't know until we test.
Our goal is to test anyone with a fever and then promptly treat them.
So what we're seeing is that we have a long way to go.
And it means if we're providing treatment for these children, if we've only tested less than half of them, we may be giving inappropriate treatment to the other half.
So the question is, why that being done?
Now earlier we mentioned that testing may not be done in the community,
And we may want  an intervention where village health workers or community health workers can be encouraged to use, trained to use these tests, and we can if that intervention works.
But it also happens in the clinic.
We found in places where the attitudes of the health workers were a bit poor.
They trust in their judgment better than the test.
The tests are actually quite accurate or else money wouldn't be spent on buying them.
But what we still want to think about is, how do we increase the confidence of the health workers?
What kind of intervention can be done in terms not just training but  supervision, reinforcement, mentorship.
So we need to design interventions that can increase the use of testing in the clinics and in the communities.
You saw this information earlier, about supervisory checklists for the community health workers doing community case management of childhood illness, and as we said at that point in time, we had major challenges in the area of history taking and examination.
Although things were improving, this area was the weakest area.
So the question there again is, can we do something to improve supervision?
What can we do?
We've seen community health worker programmes in other countries, that recognize that health staff may not have adequate transportation.
But in a smaller geographical area, one of the more experienced community health workers could serve as a peer supervisor, and be able to move around more easily in the villages to reinforce.
So an intervention that we could test through implementation research may be by using peer supervisors.
So these are the kind of things that the data should make us think, bring together the partners and stakeholders and talk about what kind of intervention might work to improve things in our own environment.
We had also addressed this issue of ivermectin coverage, or compliance.
We were able to collect information in about 5 countries, over an 8-year period, and found out how many people took or didn't take ivermectin, out of those 8 opportunities, and as you recall we did identify some particular groups at risk.
So the question is, in these years leading up to the 2020s, when we hope to eliminate the disease, what interventions can we do to make it easier to reach certain segments of the population that are less likely to comply?
So basically:
How can we reach women?
How can we reach youth?
Remember, people who are under 25 are less likely to comply.
How do we reach ethnic minorities that may be living in the community?
These are things we have to think about.
Is it a question of training the community distributors better?
Is it a question of ensuring that we have distributors from the minority groups, or distributors who are also women or youth?
What can we do?
Is there a way we can make it more convenient for people to get their ivermectin?
These are the kinds of questions we need to be asking to lead us to design, or update, our interventions to make them more effective and reach more people.
Well thank you very much for joining us and we look forward to having you with us again in the fourth chapter.
Thank you.
