In this chapter we will share a few implementation research case studies and will try to stress the importance of needs assessment in designing control and elimination programs in different settings.
Different settings have different challenges. As we mentioned in the previous chapter these settings include: community health facility, work site, and schools in urban and rural areas.
These are different geographical settings across the country.
Data and evidence from these sources should inform implementation research potentials. Gathering evidence from published and unpublished reports, surveys and other sources gives a better understanding of programme needs in that setting. Here are some case studies.
Our first example comes from adapting community directed treatment with ivermectin to addressing other health interventions.
As a first step, we had to bring together a multi-disciplinary team: programme managers, public health experts, social scientists, and epidemiologists. We gathered base line information to understand the challenges. Not only to continue ivermectin distribution, but also to improve the delivery services for malaria, tuberculosis and Vitamin A. In order to design appropriate intervention, we needed also to understand the systems at different operational levels.
By the understanding, we designed our standard intervention steps, as you can see in the slide. Because we did needs assessment at the beginning we were able to document the progress we made and able to compare it with the baseline. Basically, you can see some of the achievements on the slide. We had programme improvements not only in the delivery of services and in improving access to the services, but also the functioning of the health systems.
As you can see in the slide, the effect of community directed intervention delivery was especially dramatic for malaria interventions.
One, coverage with insecticide-treated bed nets and the percentage of children appropriately treated for malaria more than doubled.
Annual ivermectin treatment coverage also improved, possibly because of greater community commitment to the total
CDI package. In terms of costs to the health system, the CD strategy also appeared more efficient than the conventional delivery systems.
Because the study we just described was built on the foundation of of CD ivermectin treatment approach the question remained: could this Community Directed Approach work in settings that didn’t have ivermectin distribution programme?
Formative studies or needs assessment studies were done to find out whether
Whether the approach could work in groups such as: the nomads, urban poor, rural areas with no community directed treatment with ivermectin experience.
These results can encourage future IR. I would like to refer you to the article and hope you will read it. Bill will now continue with examples from the malaria programme. Thank you.
Thank you, Uche. These have been very interesting examples because this has been an ongoing programme, this onchocerciasis program since at least 20 years and we’ve been reaping the benefits not just for ochocerciasis but for IR for other health programmes. We’re gonna talk about a few malaria examples right now. One of the biggest challenges we have in malaria is getting people the right medicine at the right time.
And we’ve seen through our Global Fund reports, we’ve seen through our demographic and health or malaria indicator surveys that we have not done the best that we could in terms of making sure that sick people get the appropriate malaria drug as soon as they need it.
And this may be due to the channel through which it’s provided and we need to think of interventions that can increase access
(you’ll think back to module 1, access was one of the big issues that we talked about). So, we found that with normal public service based malaria programmes we’ve been able to possibly reach about half of people with the appropriate medicine. And so, again we’ve done needs assessments looking on our Global Fund reports, looking at our health information system reports, looking at reports from the demographic and health surveys and we see that this is not enough. So, we would then gather some additional information from interviewing people and we would try to think of some creative ways of delivering malaria drugs in an appropriate way. And one of the interventions that’s been tried in a number of countries, particularly through a special programe called the Affordable Medicines Facility for Malaria is making low cost appropriate malaria medications available to both the public, but especially the private sector.
And this is one of the things that studies have shown is that many people get their malaria drugs in the private sector. So, we would use the information we have to design the intervention that would train, supervise, and ensure the correct stock for the private sector.
Particularly, the private informal sector, they’re  called medicine sellers, medicine shops, patent medicine sellers, chemical sellers.
They have all different names. They're not available in all countries, it depends on the legal framework, but where they exist they meet a lot of the need. So, we need to use our information to design interventions for that group. We’ve talked about the issue of Intermittent Preventive Treatment (IPT) for pregnant women and the fact that new WHO guidance encourages women to get more than 2 doses of of IPT, now hopefully they can get at least 3, maybe 4 at every antenatal visit. But what we’ve seen is that in the process of increasing to  doses or more, that we are not getting better coverage.
There’s a drop-off. Which is normal in many ways, but again we need to use our needs assessment to find out is this drop off because of problems of stock out. So, we would look at our logistic management information system data to see if we are getting stocks to the local clinics. Is it a question of people not attending antenatal care enough times to benefit from the additional doses?
What we can do? If we observe we may find that nurses are forgetting to give it, they're forgetting to inquire if the women have it, they're forgetting to look at the records to see if the woman has had previous doses, or they may be giving the doses and forgetting to record it.
So, one intervention that might be tried would be a mobile health, mHealth type of programme where reminders can be sent on a regular basis to frontline clinic staff to encourage them to give IPT as many times as possible and record this.
But again, we would need to do the needs assessment to find out what the problem is and assuming that we find out by observing, doing supervisory checklists that the problem is with the health workers, not carrying out the IPT tasks to the fullest; then we can try to design interventions based on the information we get from our needs assessment. In many countries community health workers are simply there to do health promotion health education. Provide information on sanitation, on hygiene, maybe encourage people to go to the clinic and get services, get treatment, encourage people to use bed-nets if they receive them, encourage pregnant women to go to antenatal care, but in our work with malaria in particular we’ve seen that again this is a missed opportunity. That, in order to increase coverage it would be very helpful if community health workers could provide basic treatment for malaria and as we said other common illnesses in the community. So, we do need to gather information, use our reports to determine that there are people being missed.
We need to do further review of laws and legal framework, to see what about the possibility of community members handling simple medications. We need to look at the ability of communities to support volunteers. We need to look at the ability of health center staff to train and supervise. So, we need to look into,  do a needs assessment on the feasibility of this. We also can learn from other countries.
If a country has not introduced village health workers doing community case management, they can look at places like Rwanda that has well-established community health worker system where they do not only test for malaria, but also provide treatment for malaria and other childhood illnesses. So, again we can gather needs assessment info in the country and look at other programmes to learn from them. Again, related to this issue of community health workers,we don’t want to have a double standard, where you have what we call presumptive treatment of malaria.
Based on signs and symptoms in one area which would be community health workers or even medicine shops, and then at the clinic have a different standard where we’re using parasitological tests like microscopy, like RDTs - rapid diagnostic tests, and then basing treatment on that. So, we have seen pilot interventions in some countries where the community health workers have been taught successfully to use RDTs safely and accurately. So, the question is if we want to introduce that into our country we need to examine other programmes, we need to collect information on treatment seeking, we need to provide information from supervising village health workers to see what they’re capable of. So, again, we need to do a needs assessment prior to developing any of these interventions, so that we base it on the local context, the local reality and the local needs.
We have a few take home messages.
Basically, we have tried to examine how the development of implementation research comes out of an assessment of needs, a baseline assessment, situation analysis of what is happening on the ground. Not only are people having access to and receiving the services, but also from the process point of view are these services being delivered in the most effective and efficient manner.
We want to make sure that we not only have a plan to reach people and increase our targets, but that we look at the local system: the inside, the outside, the local context.
Whether we’re talking about the context of schools, or clinics, or work sites or communities, but the context of different geographical areas, different epidemiological areas in our country for the different diseases and adapt our programmes to the information that we find about those particular areas. We stress that there’re many sources of information that you can use to do your needs assessment or situation analysis.
Obviously, there’s wide variety of documents and reports on existing programmes. Some of these are from national or international agencies that have provided financial support. Some of these are internal programme reports. But we again want to look at reports and documents. We want to talk to the people.
Those, who benefit from the programmes, or potentially could benefit, but may not be. We want to talk about the people directly involved in service delivery, service management, to get all of their views about what works, what doesn’t work and why.
And then thirdly, we want to observe what is happening at the service delivery point, what is happening in the community that may influence the acceptance of a programme or access to a programme.
What is happening in schools and work sites.
We need to have a structured way.
We’ve talked about checklists, for example. To learn what’s going on in that context, in that environment.
And use that information for needs assessment to design good operations research. In conclusion, of course, we want good research questions that derive directly from available information that we’ve pulled together from existing reports or that we have gone out and collected through surveys and observation.
So that our proposed intervention that we are going to study is based and grounded in the needs of those communities and settings.
Before we go, just a little note about a couple of the resources that you can get online to help you plan implementation research and of course these have sections about the needs assessment process, the situation analysis process. We have both of these available on who.int/tdr website.
One of course, is a toolkit that can be the basis for a training programme, and the other is a framework for planning.
So, we hope you can access these materials for your use throughout this course. Thank you again for joining us in module two, Uche  and I wish you well in the rest of the course. Enjoy module 3. Thank you.
