Welcome through these video on urban context in humanitarian crisis.
The learning objectives of these videos are; to understand why urban conflicts are so important in today's humanitarian crisis, to understand the concept of urban essential services and finally we discuss on the underlying vulnerabilities of urban areas.
The world is getting more urban and the conflicts as well.
Some fifty million people worldwide are afflicted by armed conflicts in urban areas.
In addition, it is also estimated that eighty percent of displaced people find refuge in urban areas.
On top of that, there is a sharp increase of protracted conflicts all around the world resulting in an unprecedented level of humanitarian needs.
Protracted conflict seen urban areas is a challenge for humanitarian response.
Indeed humanitarian approach has been many designed to address needs in camps or rural contexts.
There is a lack of expertise and knowledge for urban settings.
In addition current funding mechanism and program in both million a yearly basis are not adapted to respond to humanitarian crises due to protracted come conflicts.
Urban areas are undoubtedly complex and so in it's definition as well.
Tokyo and the village of two thousand people in Angola are both of usually classified as urban.
There is clearly no agreed definition of the term.
Definition of urban are normally based on population density or geographic area defined by municipal authorities.
In this course we adopt a different approach.
We propose that for humanitarian action urban context to be defined as the area within which civilians vulnerable to the distruption in essential services reside.
And the network of complements supporting their services.
As shown in this figure, critical components of essential services for instance electrical power plants, supply routes water and wastewater treatment plants are often located outside the city limits.
Very distant active combat can verse have a dramatic effect on urban dwellers.
Essential urban services are understood to be those services that are vital to ensure the subsistence of the civilian population including electricity, water, health, waste water treatment and solid waste disposal.
All are banned services require three elements in order to function.
People.
Meaning service providers staff, private sector contractors or entrepreneurs
Hardware. meaning the infrastructure but as well the equipment and the machinery.
And consumables.
Meaning the fuel, the medicines etc.
Disruption to an essential servce occurs when the function of any of the critical people, hardware or consumable are compromised.
Shut down distruption to an essential service may not have a major impact on the survival of the Syrian population.
Why?
It's a deterioration over the long term pose a greater risk as we see later on
Urban areas are very complex and characterized by a number of features which result in the residents being particularly exposed and vulnerable to armed conflict.
The main vulnerability of people in urban context is their reliance on essential services.
The services are beyond the technical capacity of the direct physical control of the residents.
It affect the resilience of the inhabitants.
The essential services consist of sophisticated large scale infrastructure which rely on the virility of special expertise, a potentially fragile governance structures or complex logistics.
Some essential services depend on others simply not there to not to fail.
For instance, let's say the quality of health services we depend on potable water on the consumable and reliable power supply.
Another example ground water, which can be as well contaminated by a properly maintained landfill site.
Another factor affecting the vulnerability is the scale.
Because of the relatively large special scale of urban context, distruption to an essential service can have a large scale impact.
The destruction of a single power line can result in an electricity blackout across an entire neighborhood comprising maybe two hundred thousand people.
Finally densely populated urban areas are not only at greater risk from epidemic, there are also setting in which people can more readily clash with each other along opposing political, sectarian or tribal lines or across musical political borders as well the authorities.
Humanitarian response in urban areas is a major challenge of today's humanitarian crisis.
In other to summarize this introduction on urban context.
Let's watch the following I.C.R.C.
Documentary on urban challenges.
Supplying water in an urban environment is a unique, complex challenge.
Water is usually concentrated in one place and is pumped or otherwise taken from its source to be treated.
All it takes is for a bomb to hit the pumping station or water pipe, and the supply to 100,000 people is cut off.
Sadly, water supplies often become strategic targets in conflict.
You cut the water and you immediately drive people away.
The ICRC has a key role to play.
Firstly by reminding the parties to the conflict to spare such infrastructure, and secondly by restoring water supplies when they are cut.
We have to be very creative.
We successfully built a waste-water treatment plant serving more than 150,000 people in the city of Rafah.
Our engineers had the ingenious idea of using bits of the old wall between
Egypt and the Gaza Strip to lay the foundations for the treatment pools.
It gave people hope to see that it was still possible to do something in Gaza despite the blockade. that also enabled us to begin talks with the Israeli authorities.
We succeeded in bringing in the machinery needed to complete the treatment plant.
No power means no water.
It was a major challenge for the ICRC to restore power. during the fighting, power cuts were frequent.
On several occasions, for their own safety, the ICRC escorted technicians from Gaza city to installations.
Their job was to put damaged electricity poles back up and restore the power supply. a gaza without power is a Gaza without water and without functioning hospitals.
It's straightaway a humanitarian disaster.
There is a direct correlation between water shortages or poor-quality water and diseases such as cholera.
We see this time and time again.
Whenever people face water shortages or the water has not been treated properly, we immediately see outbreaks of disease.
Working in an urban setting means trying to improve water supplies.
We do this in partnership with the national, regional and local water boards.
Their staff have often had to leave the country because of conflict and have to be retrained with our help. the key here is communication, dialogue and mutual understanding both with the parties to the conflict and with public services.
In Haiti, the ICRC's role was vital.
For years, we oversaw the installation and repair of water supply points in Cité-Soleil.
At the time, the neighbourhood was controlled by gangs and the authorities were unable to enter.
The ICRC also gave the authorities the confidence to start working there again.
Initially, we accompanied them when they entered the neighbourhood to repair the water-supply network.
We were the only ones able to carry out such a large-scale project.
We're talking about providing
200,000 people with drinking water for several years, thanks to this project.
The authorities have now almost fully resumed control. they enter the neighbourhood unaccompanied and make repairs without ICRC help.
One of the trends observed by the ICRC is rampant urbanization.
More and more neighbourhoods are springing up on the outskirts of cities
Public services cannot keep up.
Water supplies are often non-existent or very inefficient.
The supply network often breaks down and these are areas where tensions often erupt.
This trend is set to continue.
We must maintain our expertise and be ready to enter these neighbourhoods to install or restore the water supply, or to get the authorities in charge to do so.
The results speak for themselves.
Restoring water to a frightened community, facing the fatal consequences of a lack of water, is hugely satisfying.
