Previously, you learned different functional groups.
Today I would like to talk in more detail about the first functional group – water sources.
We will get familiar with the water cycle and different water sources, identify major criteria for choosing a water source, get familiar with immediate and long-term measures needed and understand the advantages, limitations and sensitivities of different water sources.
Lets look at the natural water cycle.
Rainwater falls onto the ground.
When collected directly from an available roof structure or a constructed ground catchment area can supplement other sources of water even if it is not used as the main water supply.
Rain water becomes surface water as soon as it reaches the ground.
Directly or as surface runoff it accumulates in surface depressions.
While lakes, reservoirs or ponds are standing or slow-moving water bodies, rivers or streams flow by gravity across the land towards the sea or another river or lake.
Surface water is the easiest source to access, but not necessarily the easiest source to use for water supply.
Rainwater falling onto the ground infiltrates through the soil, fractures and openings in rock until it reaches the water table and joins the groundwater flow system.
The geological formation or layer consisting of pervious materials and conducting water is called aquifer.
There is always a balance between the amount of water stored in an aquifer, the volume of water which leaves the aquifer through natural groundwater flow and abstraction by pumping and the amount of water it receives through recharge.
If the balance is negative and excessively more water is pumped than recharged, pumping will increasingly become more expensive and the well eventually will run dry.
How do we select a water source?
First we need to identify water sources which could be used without tinkering.
For each source, we consider four major criteria:
Water quantity – what is a yield of the water source and how does it relates to the demand?
Is the source intermittent or strongly affected by seasonality?
The minimum yield of the water source should still be greater than demand.
If this is not the case, combination of several sources to cover demand should be considered.
Sufficient storage capacity might help to improve reliability of supply.
While this open well is full throughout the year, during few month of the dry season, water level sinks considerably.
Water quality.
Obviously, it is always advisable to choose the source with the better water quality.
Surface water and often karstic springs are likely to be affected by increased turbidity and organic matter content, especially during rain events.
High content of particles and organic matter complicates water disinfection and overall water treatment system.
Groundwater is rather likely to have low turbidity and lower content of pathogenic microorganisms compared to surface waters.
Although the goal is always to provide sufficient amount of good quality water, it is not always possible in an emergency context.
If there is an alternative, large quantities of reasonably good quality water should always be preferred to small quantities of very good quality water.
Consider how water quality is and will be affected in future by sanitation practices, agriculture and possible point contamination sources.
On this picture you see that water is obviously turbid, and obviously is used by animals.
The third criteria is the type of the technology and resources required for exploitation of the water source.
In all cases – use the help of gravity to avoid pumping water, if you can.
If technology is available in place, are there also skills and qualified people for source exploitation and for future maintenance?
The costs of source exploitation including initial investment, operational and maintenance costs need to be considered as well.
Time required for exploitation of the source need to be taken into consideration in an emergency context as well.
The forth important criteria is accessibility and acceptance of the source.
Any obvious legal, security, social, political or cultural constrains should be taken into account.
If needed and possible they should be reduced to a level acceptable to users.
It might take long time to influence or change a certain culturally influenced behavior in one case.
An in another case, sometimes a short intensive hygiene promotion campaign can be very effective.
And the last, use of water source can have environmental and health impacts which might not be obvious at a first step.
If you plan for a long term - take environment into the equation to avoid for example creation of mosquito breeding places, or consider what effect a failing dam might have on the downstream population.
River is a natural flow of fresh water across the land towards a sea, another river or lake.
A catchment area of a river is the area from which any particular river receives both surface flow and drainage water originating from precipitation.
Throughout the course of a river, the water transported downstream is in constant interaction with underlying groundwater system, and may gain or loose water to groundwater.
Seasonal variations, up to complete drying of a river are expected.
Lakes and ponds are standing or slow moving surface water bodies which form naturally from rain, surface run-off or river water.
Reservoirs are man-made lakes which are created by flooding the land behind a dam.
Besides the interconnection between groundwater and lake water which depends on soil structure, losses through evaporation should be taken into consideration.
River and lake water quality is highly variable by nature due to types of rocks, vegetation, climate, and human activities such as discharge of wastewater, industrial waste and surface run-off from fields.
In most cases, the quality of surface water sources is poor and water requires treatment.
An exception can be upstream water close to the source in mountain areas which can be free of contamination and can be collected and delivered through simple gravity supply system.
For lakes and ponds, water quality in the center of the lake might be considerably better than close to the shore due to settling, natural biological processes and sunlight degrading contamination.
If surface water is affected by poorly treated industrial wastewater discharge, it should really be considered as the last possible option as treatment of such water is highly complex.
Rivers are multiple sources of water and water is used for irrigation, bathing, washing of clothes, industry and ecosystem services.
Development of water sources through dams and intakes in many cases cause deterioration of its quality, limited access of the downstream population and degradation of ecosystem services with numerous negative consequences.
Groundwater flowing naturally from the earth subsurface to the surface forms a spring.
Flow may be identified at a certain point which is called spring eye.
If it is rather more diffuse area, it is called seepage.
The locations of the springs can change due to changes in the water table during the dry and wet season.
Green vegetation contrasting to the surrounding sometimes can help to identify the springs at a distance.
Otherwise, reading and understanding of geological maps as well as practical experience will be necessary to locate the springs.
Compared to other water sources, tapping springs is rather cheap considering that construction costs are comparably low and no pump is needed for water abstraction.
A good well requires an appropriate source of groundwater, but locating it is difficult.
Like surface water, ground water flow is influenced by gravity, unless it meets less permeable rock.
Thus, obviously, groundwater is likely to be closer to the surface in the bottom of the valley than on top of a mountain.
However, siting a well usually will require a hydrogeologist with considerable practical expertise, information on the local geological formations and good luck.
Existing records on the available dug wells and boreholes with soil data, yield and depth might provide additional information which can help to site the well.
Having located a good source of groundwater, we would need to chose an appropriate well construction method.
The flow of groundwater is slower due to resistance caused by interconnected system of pores, spaces, fractures and varies from few meters per day to few meters per year.
It depends also on the hydraulic gradient.
The result of the slow movement of water is that there is sufficient time to dissolve chemicals from the rocks and soils it passes through.
Water spending long time underground in rather soluble rock areas will have higher total dissolved solids which can lead to the increased salinity of water.
Thus, salinity values measured by conductivity probes might give an indication on the risks caused by pit latrines and other possible relevant sources of contamination.
Once groundwater is polluted, it is very difficult to restore its quality.
Rainwater can be collected from roofs and stored in rain water tank or collected as surface run-off in rainwater catchment dams or reservoirs.
It is rarely used as a major water source, but rather to supplement existing sources.
The quality of rain water collected from the roofs is usually good if it is collected through an adequate rain water harvesting system, properly stored and supplied.
Improper roofing materials, roof contamination through bird droppings, dust and insects, luck of first flush mechanism, poor collection and storage design will inevitably lead to recontamination, poor water quality as well as algal growth and mosquito breeding in storage tanks.
Seawater has a salinity of 3.5% meaning that every liter of water contains 35 g of salt per liter.
Total dissolved solids content is usually used to describe the content of salt and minerals.
Brackish water forming usually in the areas of mixing of salt water and fresh water, such as estuaries or in groundwater has a TDS between
1000-10000 mg/L. To remove salt from water, desalination is required.
Desalination has high energy demand.
Concentrated salt solution is produced as a waste stream during some desalination processes requires careful disposal, as it can lead to strong deterioration of the environment and cause risk of salinization of other groundwater and surface water sources.
Due to high costs, high maintenance requirements of desalination technologies, it is usually advisable to consider desalination as the last possible option and chose other available sources.
To sum up:
- Water quantity, quality, technology required for exploitation as well as accessibility and acceptance are the major criteria we use to chose a water source
- Surface waters are likely to be polluted and often affected by seasonality
- Finding groundwater is not easy and requires expertise.
Protection of sources needed.
- Desalination of sea or brackish waters as well as using industrially polluted waters should be the last possible option
