In this lecture we will look in more detail at different water intakes.
We will get to know most commonly used water intake structures, will discuss applicability of different intakes under certain conditions as well as their major advantages and disadvantages.
Rain water collection systems include roof water collection system if possible with first flush mechanism to discharge possibly contaminated fist roof run-off just at the beginning of raining event.
Usually those are simple gutters connected to the water storage tanks.
In dry areas rain water may become an important or even major water source and surface runoff is collected by constructing a rain water catchment dam.
In dry areas rain water may become an important or even major water source and surface runoff is collected by constructing a rain water catchment dam over a natural rain water catchment area.
The dam blocks rainwater run-off and is collected in an reservoir and stored over loner time.
The reservoirs are usually constructed in a way that they provide sufficient water for the whole year.
High contamination of water as well as risk of mosquito breeding are the major disadvantages of these system.
Surface water intakes differ depending on the characteristics of rivers or lakes.
Usually these are simple and robust structures generally located upstream of industries, densely populated areas, intensively used agricultural areas or wastewater discharge places.
Unprotected river intake consists of a submerged pipe placed on the bottom of the river (figures a and b).
The outlet of the pipe is elevated from the bottom of the river and protected with a screen and a strainer to avoid sand, gravel or fish entering the pipes.
Sand entering the pump can damage most pumps irreversibly within seconds.
Protected river intake includes a number of screens to keep out floating material such as trees and branches . The protected intake should be elevated to at least 1 m above the riverbed to avoid entering of boulders and rolling stones.
The inlets should be always submerged at least
0.3 m under the surface to avoid formation of water vortices leading to suction of air which could affect the pump.
Seasonal changes of water level should e considered during design and planning.
Floating intakes are used to abstract water near the surface to avoid silt loads which form at the bottom of the water source . A flexible plastic pipe is connected to a float
(‘pontoon’), which can be constructed by attaching a steel or wooden frame to floats made from empty drums or plastic containers.
Screens should be used to retain coarse material floating on the surface which might clog pipes and pumps.
Riverbank intake works by constructing a well from the river (ca. 50 m riverbank) to tap the sub-surface flow.
Since water is filtered through the river bank, the microbiological water quality is improved.
The top of the well should be sealed to prevent contamination of the abstracted water.
Spring water collection systems are constructed to catch and protect quality of the spring water.
For gravity springs, a spring box is usually installed which collects the water from the aquifer and channels it to a single discharge point.
From there spring water can be led to a storage tank.
A spring box provides many benefits since it protects the water from contamination, stores the water and also acts as settling basin of particles such as sand and silt.
Contamination from the surface is prevented through a concrete seal on the surface and through the placement of a drain which diverts infiltrating surface water away from the spring box.
When groundwater source is located an appropriate well construction method should be chosen.
Depending on the retype of soil, depth of groundwater, required capacity and availability of technology and skills, wells can be built in a variety of ways.
These included wells, hand drilled wells, jetted wells, wells build by percussion, direct or reverse circulation rotary drilling or down the hole hummer.
In this picture here, you can see an example of drilling truck.
Lets look at the few types of the wells in more detail.
Dug wells are traditional methods to extract shallow groundwater.
Dug wells are often excavated manually (‘hand-dug well’) are large enough for persons to go in and clean it or deepen it.
A protected dug well consist of a well head and a well shaft which is lined with strong material down to 3-4m below the water table
. The well head is the visible structure at the surface and is composed of a concrete seal, a well cover (‘apron’), a safe water lifting device such as a hand pump and a drainage channel.
Under the well head follows the well shaft and the intake area where groundwater can be accessed by the pump.
At least the top 5 m of the well shaft should by lined to stabilize the well and ensure that surface water entering the well has been filtered during the passage.
A borehole is a hole drilled into the ground reaching groundwater bodies.
Groundwater infiltrates the well and is extracted with manual or motorized pumps.
After drilling a hole, several elements have to be added before the well can be used.
The well head (‘apron’) and sanitary concrete seal protect the hole from contaminants entering the well;
Similarly like for the dug-wells.
The well casing stabilizes the well from collapsing and infiltration from contaminants.
Steel and PVC pipes are normally used for lining the well walls.
The well screen holds back sediments but not water from entering the well.
When using PVC pipes for the lining, these can be slit to create fine cuts acting as barrier for sediments.
The gravel pack between the screen and the borehole is required if the soil grains are smaller than the screen slots.
Generally boreholes are less subjected to contamination compared to dug wells.
Some of the drilling methods are faster and safer compared to dug wells.
However, drilling needs expertise and availability of the technology as well as more professional and complex maintenance.
In contrary, dug wells have lower costs than drilled wells for construction and maintenance.
So, to sum up, during this lecture we have shortly reviewed different water intake structures and their applicability for different type of sources.
Surface water intake structures vary depending if protection of the intake from rolling stones or debris is needed or not, water level changes as well as need of water pre-filtration through water infiltration wells.
The rainwater collection system differ depending if water is collected from roof and used as a supplementary water source during the rain season, or if year-lasting water supply is needed and larger catchment area needs to be used.
Variety of well construction methods exist, which depend on soil characteristics as well as required depth and capacity and availability of tools and skills.
Dug wells are rather traditional, simple and well accepted technology, which is lower in costs than drilled wells.
However, construction of the drilled wells is faster and safer compared to dug wells, risk of contamination is lower and deeper groundwater layers can be accessed.
