Hello.
Water abstraction involves collecting raw water at the source intake system and transporting it to the treatment plant, storage tank, distribution network or directly to the consumer, depending on the scale and design of the system.
Today we will look at different water abstraction technologies, such as gravity supplies, pump types and energy sources needed to drive them.
We consider in more detail the basic working principles of different pump types as well as their applicability and limitations.
Finally, we will look at how to read and understand the pump curves needed for selecting and specifying an appropriate pump and consider main factors influencing operation of a pumping station.
The best way to abstract water in many cases is by using gravity.
Gravity flow water supply is a system in which water falls due to its own weight from a source situated above, to the users below.
The process is driven by the potential energy water has due to its elevation.
Due to missing moving parts, relative simplicity of the system, the gravity water supply schemas do not require complex maintenance and are rather robust and reliable.
To design a gravity flow water supply system you would need to calculate the pipe diameter required, considering the elevation difference and losses due to friction in the pipe as well as energy losses produced by turbulence introduced by everything which is not straight: valves, elbows, reductions.
Furthermore, you would need to study the topography of the system to minimize high and low points which can lead to the air trapping or accumulation of sediments and to avoid negative pressures.
Break-pressure tanks might be required if heights difference is considerable.
There are few softwares and freeware available, which can help you to design a gravity flow system, without having a full understanding of the system hydraulics.
If location of the water sources and topographical characteristics of the area do not allow the use of gravity, pumps need to be used.
Pumps are used to lift water against the gravity or pressurize it to move it through a pipeline at a required flow rate.
A huge variety of technologies have evolved and have been introduced for different uses and needs.
The pumps are often grouped according to the type of operation to manual and motorized pumps.
For the motorized pumps, different energy sources can be used to drive the pump, such as diesel, electricity, wind, solar energy.
Furthermore, considering the method of displacement of water applied by a pump, we can distinguish between impulse pumps, positive displacement pumps and velocity pumps.
Hydraulic ram pump uses highs difference and water hummer effect to develop pressure which allows a part of the input water to be lifted up higher than the water source without any external energy supply.
Each 1 m difference in the feed pipe, can pump water almost 30 m up.
Hydraulic ram pumps require two things: a reliable source of running water and a working fall.
The pump works as follows: Water flows from the source A by gravity thorough the drive pipe B, picks up speed and kinetic energy until the increasing drug force closes the waste valve C. The momentum of the water flow against the closed waste valve causes water hummer.
The pressure in the pipe rises, and the check valve D opens and some water is forced into the delivery pipe.
With slowing of the movement of water, the check valve closes, water moves back, and forward again restarting the process.
The pressure vessel E, contains air to reduce the hydraulic shock and improving efficiency by more constant flow of water.
These kind of systems work for long time without any maintenance as long as water is available.
Ram pumps a specially suitable for communities in hilly areas with water sources located lower than the community or on another side of the valley.
A positive displacement pump makes a fluid move by trapping a fixed amount and forcing
(displacing) that trapped volume into the discharge pipe.
Basically, the pump uses a principle of expanding space or cavity on the suction side and decreasing cavity on the discharge side.
The volume remains constant during one cycle of operation, which means that theoretically, positive displacement pumps should produce the same flow when the speed is constant, independently on the pressure on the discharge side.
Depending on the type of mechanism used to move water, the positive displacement pumps can be classified in three major groups: reciprocating type positive displacement, rotary-type positive displacement and linear type positive displacement.
Reciprocating type positive displacement pumps are commonly used in a number of applications.
Many community hand pumps for dug wells and boreholes are reciprocating piston or plunger pumps.
When water is available less than 7 meters below ground, suction pumps are often of an interest, as they can be easily accessed at the ground level to perform maintenance.
For deeper wells and boreholes, direct action hand pumps or high lift hand pumps raising water from the depth of up to 45or even 100 m can be used.
Rotary-type positive displacement pumps use rotating mechanism that creates vacuum and captures and draws water.
Rotary vane pump consists of vanes placed in a circular rotor that rotates inside a circular cavity.
The centers of these two circles are offset, causing the vanes to slide in and out of rotor creating chambers.
Progressive cavity pump also known as helical rotor pump transfers water by progressing it through the sequence of small sized cavities when rotor turns.
These type of pumps are as well fixed flow pumps, operating at a constant flow rate which is proportional to the rotation speed and almost independent on head.
The pumping head is directly proportional to the power input.
This type of pump is robust and is less sensitive to particles in water than other positive displacement pumps and can be used even to pump sludge.
Abrasive materials will however damage the pump.
It is quite common pump used for motorized pumping of water from boreholes.
A rope pump is a pump which consists of a hanging rope placed in the well and drawn up through a long pipe with the bottom immersed in water.
Round disks - washers matching the diameter of the pipe are attached to the rope.
Those pull water to the surface.
These type of pumps is commonly used in rural areas on hand dug wells for community or self-supply of water.
If the positive displacement pumps operate by manipulating the available space inside the pump, the velocity pumps operate by manipulating the velocity of the fluid during its movement through the pump.
A radial flow pump, also known as centrifugal pump, first converts energy of a motor first into velocity or better to say, kinetic energy by a rotating impeller.
When impeller rotates, its spins the water sitting in the cavities between the vanes outward and provides centrifugal acceleration.
As water leaves, the low pressure area is creating leading to suction of more water.
The kinetic energy of water coming out of an impeller is afterwards harnessed by creating resistance to the flow.
Water meets a stationary diffuser or volute, which slows it down and converts the kinetic energy into the pressure energy.
Axial-flow pumps differ from radial flow centrifugal pumps in principle by the design of the rotating elements.
The axial flow pumps use element similar to a propeller, which moves (or pushes) water axially and operate usually at much smaller pressures and higher flows than centrifugal pumps.
Mixed pumps do both – radial acceleration and pushing of water., and let water exist the impeller between 0 and 90 degrees from axial direction.
This leads to higher operating pressures and flow rates.
Both axial flow and mixed flow pumps are not very common in emergency water supply applications.
A practical difference between velocity and positive displacement pumps is how they operate under closed valve conditions.
Positive displacement pumps physically displace fluid, so closing a valve downstream of a positive displacement pump produces a continual pressure build up that can cause mechanical failure and damage of pipeline or pump.
Velocity pumps differ in that they can be safely operated under closed valve conditions.
Due to the different operating principle, pumping head of positive displacement pump theoretically does not depend on the pump speed, while for velocity pumps, discharge rates vary considerably with the head against water is being pumped.
That is a reason why you need to read and understand pump curves if you need to chose and specify a centrifugal pump.
A typical Pump curve has two axes: horizontal one which shows the flow rate through the pump and vertical one, showing head, also sometimes called pressure.
The first information we can read from any pump curve is the flow the pump will develop at any given operating head.
This curve is called also pump performance curve.
Any piping system used to transport pumped water can be characterized by a head loss, which as well depends on the flow rate of water in the system.
Head loss will increase with the flow rate.
This red curve is called system characteristics curve.
The point where the pump performance curve and system characteristics curves intersect is called pump operating point or duty point.
At the duty point, there is a balance between the system demands and what the pump can deliver.
For each pump, the manufacturer of the pump will define the allowable pump operating range, indicating the values of Minimum und maximum flow rate Q min and Q max.
The operating point of the pump needs to be in the operating range of the pump to provide trouble free operation of the pump.
For centrifugal pumps, multiple curves can be pictured on the pump curve.
Those show the performance of the pump at different impeller diameters.
Impellers can be trimmed to match the impeller to the head and flow needed in the application within the given range.
In addition to head and flow, pump curves will also provide efficiency information.
Efficiency is the relationship between the input power and the water power being generated by the pump.
Obviously, no pump has 100% efficiency, and pumps require more input power than water power generated by the pump.
The best efficiency point on this example is 60%.
The middle part of the pump curve illustrates the net positive head required NPSH, which is basically, the suction characteristics of the pump at different flows.
Each point along the curve shows the positive suction head in meters required to avoid for example cavitation which can damage the pump.
As you see on the picture, it does not differ a lot for different impeller trims.
The lowest graph at the bottom of the pump curve shows usually the power curve.
This curve indicates how much power the pump will require at any particular flow point.
This information is useful for calculating power consumption costs and ensuring that selected motor is suitable for the chosen pump.
Pumping stations belong to many water supply systems which require delivery of water from source to treatment or distribution network and it cannot be done by entirely by gravity.
Interruption or a breakdown of a pumping station leads inevitably to the interruption of the water supply of the entire area.
In order to increase reliability of a pumping station, adequate standby capacity is required.
Trained operators, regular servicing, reliable energy sources and spare parts are the major factors which need to be ensured.
Rehabilitation of the pumping stations belongs to the common activities required in an emergency context, especially in urban and peri-urban areas affected by the crisis.
While in few cases, provision of fuel can be already sufficient, in other cases, complex service, repair and replacement can be required.
Hereby you can see a video from Lebanon, illustrating the rehabilitation of the water pumping systems in Beqaa.
During this lecture we discussed gravity water supply, and learned that gravity supplies in hilly areas are usually simple systems which do not require high degree of maintenance.
Furthermore, we looked at the basic operating principles and differences of various common types of pumps such as impulse pumps, positive displacement pumps and velocity pumps and learned how to read pump curves of centrifugal pumps.
Finally we mentioned major factors needed for reliable operation of a pumping station.
See you during the next lecture.
