Here is your source water.
How do we make it to look so?
And even if looks so, is it really safe?
During this lecture, we will find out about different water treatment steps, processes and technologies, understand basic principles behind most commonly used technologies.
We will also discuss advantages, disadvantages and limitations of each treatment process.
All water treatment methods can be divided in five major groups which can function as a single step treatment or should be applied as part of a large multi-stage treatment.
The five groups of methods are structured around the type of contaminants removed by the method.
Those groups are clarification which is removal of particulate matter, inactivation of microorganisms also called disinfection, desalination, and reduction of concentrations of geogenic and anthropogenic contaminants to meet water quality guidelines.
A meaningful combination of technologies is in most cases necessary to achieve the WHO water quality standards for safe drinking water.
The choice of technologies or its combinations we make depends on the many factors including available water resources, their quality and seasonality, legal requirements, scale, space, financial resources, local availability of products, consumables and skills as well as available energy sources.
The purpose of clarification is to remove as much as possible particulate material.
The conventional treatment systems usually apply coagulation/flocculation combined with sedimentation or filtration.
Rapid sand filtration without coagulation is used as well on large centralized drinking water treatment plants or community supplies.
In community supplies, roughing filtration has been used successfully as efficient and low maintenance pre-treatment.
Coagulation is usually a pre-treatment step.
Its goal is to change the fine dispersed particles into larger agglomerates that can be removed by sedimentation or filtration or both.
In coagulation process, a metal salt such as aluminium or iron salts are added to water containing dispersed often negatively charged particles.
Aluminium or iron ions destabilize the particles by neutralizing their charge.
Water is being mixed rapidly and pH might need a correction.
The destabilized particles form flocks which grow larger during slow mixing and finally settle down or can be easier filtered out.
Another method of reducing particulate matter content is a rapid sand filtration.
Water passes through the filter media which is coarse or medium sized sand, which is loaded over the more coarse gravel layer.
During filtration, solids get trapped, settle or adsorb onto the sand material.
After trapped material accumulated in the filter layers, the filter requires backwashing – reverse flow of water to remove accumulated material.
The filters are operated at linear velocity of 1-40 m/h, which is considerably higher than in slow sand filters which we discuss later.
The filter can be constructed with locally available resources and does not require consumables, but proper design, adequate operational parameters and maintenance are crucial for good performance.
For a rather turbid waters, roughing filters can be used prior to rapid or slow sand filtration or disinfection.
Differently sized coarse material is used in roughing filters.
The size decreases in the direction of flow.
Gravel from riverbed, broken stones, rocks or bricks, plastics, burnt charcoal or coconut fibre can be used as filtration media.
There are different configurations of roughing filters: up-flow, down-flow or horizontal flow.
In an up-flow filter you see here, water moves from down to top and the retained solids accumulate predominantly in the bottom of the filter.
They can be flushed out by reversing the flow or simply draining the filter.
They are quite simple to maintain, do not require any chemicals and have low operational costs.
Filter design, maintenance practices and raw water quality fluctuations can influence the performance to a large extent.
Disinfection of drinking water ensures that bacteria viruses and protozoa have been inactivated or removed from water so they do not longer pose health risk.
Disinfection is always done after clarification and not before, as particles reduce the efficiency of many disinfectants.
Disinfection by chlorination is most commonly used method.
Chlorine or sodium hypochlorite can also be produced on-site by hypochlorite generators by electrolysis of salt.
Ozone and UV light inactivate microorganisms while slow sand filtration and membranes filtration are based on filtration purely or combined with biological processes.
When chlorine is dissolved in water, it forms equilibrium between the chlorine Cl2, hypochlorous acid HOCl and hydrochloric acid HCl by this reaction forming:
When chlorine is added to water, it reacts first with reduced compounds and is being destructed.
At a higher dose, it reacts also with organic matter and nitrogen species to form chloro-organic and chloramine compounds, which at higher dose of chlorine are partly destructed.
Breakpoint is the point at which complete oxidation of all chloramine species occurred.
Figure summarizes the processes occurring during breakpoint chlorination.
In short, at first chlorine residual increases proportionally to the amount of chlorine added until the mole ratio of ammonia to chlorine is about 1.
Beyond that, addition of chlorine reduces total chlorine residual due to oxidation of some chloramine species.
Breakpoint (point C) is the point at which complete oxidation of all chloramine species occurred.
The location of this point depends on the presence of organic matter, nitrogen and reduced inorganic ions.
After the breakpoint is reached, free chlorine residual proportionally increases with the chlorine dose.
After the breakpoint is reached, free chlorine residual proportionally increases with the chlorine dose.
The part of chlorine which participates in disinfection and is called chlorine demand.
The part which remains in water after chlorine demand is satisfied is called total chlorine.
The free chlorine is chlorine which is present in water in form of hypochlorous acid HOCl or hypochlorite ion OCl-.
Free chlorine inactivates microorganisms or kills them during a defined period of time, called contact time.
Chlorine residual is the chlorine which remains in water after the disinfection process has been predominantly completed and acts as a safeguard against additional microbial contamination that could be introduced in the distribution network or at the point of use.
Recommended residual chlorine concentration is about 0.5 mg/L of free chlorine which should be applied to water during at least 30 min.
Chlorine dose is being expressed in concentration multiplied by contact time, called Ct value.
Ct99 means the concentration and time required to kill 99 % of target microorganisms.
IN case of bacteria, the Ct values are low, indicating the inactivation of bacteria occurs relatively fast and at low concentration.
The time and concentration are considerably higher to inactivate viruses, and very high for protozoa, indicating that chlorination is not very efficient for protozoa inactivation.
Cryptosporidium oocysts are resistant to chlorine which often does not provide sufficient level of inactivation to protect from a disease.
Presence of particulate matter in water leading to high turbidity of water compromise chlorination and water has to be clarified before it can be disinfected with chlorine.
There are different forms of chlorine available, and it can even be produced on site by electrolysis of salt and water.
The choice of the most appropriate form of chlorine will depend on such factors as scale and water volume which needs to be treated, skills available, safety management practices and power supply reliability.
Ozone is highly effective oxidant, not only disinfecting water but also reducing color, micro pollutants content and other organic contamination.
It is however expensive and does not provide residual protection.
Due to high costs and relative complexity it is usually not used in the developmental or emergency context.
In contrary, UV disinfection is cheap and relatively simple.
It inactivates microorganisms by damaging their DANN and RNA.
In contrary to chlorination it is also efficient against protozoa.
No supply of chemicals is also an advantage of the method.
However, it does not provide residual protection, requires reliable power supply and frequent cleaning of the UV lamps which are the source of UV light.
As well as in case of chlorination, it is sensitive to turbidity and water should be clarified before UV treatment.
Slow sand filters are operated at slower filtration rates of 0.1-0.3 m/h compare to rapid sand filters which are commonly operated at 1-40 m/h.
Slow filtration rates allow development of a biological activity within the filter.
Thus the slow sand filtration is a combination of different biological and physical processes including Mechanical trapping, Adsorption or attachment, Predation and Natural death leading to reduction of solids but also micro and macro organisms .Slow sand filters are usually down-flow filters and are operated by gravity.
Each filter requires ripening period of few days to few weeks, until removal rates stabilize.
Mainly the top layer of the slow sand filter contains a diverse microbiological community and particles which is also called schmutzdecke, where inactivation of microorganisms occurs.
The technology is simple, low cost and has a long lifespan, but requires large area and is sensitive to mal-operation or during the periods of excessive turbidity or algal matter in inflow.
During membrane filtration was is driven by pressure difference between the feed water and filtrate through a filter with pores of a defined size range. usually polymeric membranes and sometime ceramic membranes are used.
Microfiltration has pores in the size of bacteria or high and removes them and particulate matter by siue exclusion.
Ultrafiltration membranes are more tight and remove also viruses which is the size of 20-80 nm.
Nanofiltration requires considerable higher pressure as the pores are small and is capable of retaining macromolecules and larger ions.
Small ions such as salt ions can be removed by reverse osmosis, requiring even higher pressure.
For disinfection purposes, ultrafiltration membranes are most common as an effective barrier against pathogenic microorganisms and particles.
Different configurations of membranes are available.
In drinking water supply hollow fiber membranes are commonly used.
Spiral wound elements – so flat membrane is rolled together with a spacer- are more often used in desalination processes.
Flat sheet membrane modules are more often used in wastewater treatment in membrane bioreactors.
Membranes need to be frequently backflushed to remove a layer of particles or microorganisms accumulating on the surface of the membrane.
This layer is also called fouling layer.
The drinking water filtration systems offer constant and reliable operation, which however requires high degree of automation, reliable power supply and relatively high costs.
There are also gravity driven systems on the market and in development, more suitable for remote applications.
Desalination is used to remove salt from sea or brackish water.
If a semipermeable membrane is installed between pure and saline water containers, pure water be drawn by saline water creating osmotic pressure.
In order to overcome this osmotic pressure, external pressure which is higher than osmotic pressure, needs to be applied.
Seawater has an osmotic pressure of about
25 bar.
Thus RO systems are operated at 30-70 bar to achieve movement of pure water from saline water through the membrane.
Thus, high pressure pumps and good power supply are required, as well as pretreatment to protect membranes from fouling.
Chemical contaminants are either naturally occurring chemicals in rocks and soils such as F and As or synthetic chemicals introduced into environment through industrial waste and wastewater, agricultural practices or untreated municipal wastewater.
Adsorption on granular activated carbon, sometimes ozonation as well as nanofiltration or RO are common methods to reduce concentrations to the acceptable level.
It is quite complex and costly processes and it is advisable to look for other water sources if this is possible if concentrations of synthetic chemicals are too high.
Fluoride and arsenic are most commonly occurring geogenic chemicals which pose a health risk.
There are few methods based on adsorption, coagulation, ion exchange and membranes to reduce concentrations of these chemicals.
All of them have advantages and disadvantages and no best option exist yet.
There is a large variety of different treatment technologies and part of these we have not considered here.
Some processes are still in development or few promising systems still exist as pilots.
Nevertheless in this course we considered major conventional drinking water treatment steps which include clarification and disinfection.
Disinfection is not efficient if water is turbid, and thus clarification needs to be done before.
Geogenic and anthropogenic contamination of water require special additional treatment steps, which adds complexity to the system
Desalination of sea water is complex, has high energy demand and often only appropriate in cases were ultimately no other water source is available.
So, we clarified and disinfected this water.
Let’s drink it!
