Hello and welcome to the last presentation of this week summarizing the key messages.
During this week we have focused on the different water supply systems and technologies.
We have learned almost every water supply system at any scale can be presented as a combination of technologies from 6 different functional groups.
We have looked in more detail at every functional group and discussed different technologies, mostly applied in conventional water treatment schemas.
Finally in each relevant functional group we shortly discussed measures and technologies rather specific for emergency water supply.
The six functional groups include source, intake, abstraction, treatment, distribution and transport as well as user safety.
By combining the technologies from left to right, we can create system templates for different water sources, scales and local conditions, preferences and enabling environment.
Major drinking water sources include surface water, ground water, rain water and sometimes sea water can be used if no other water sources are available.
The major criteria for selecting a water source include water quantity, water quality, technology required for exploitation and accessibility and acceptance.
Water is collected from the sources through an intake systems.
These can be water storage dams, protected springs, dug wells or boreholes, as well as protected and unprotected river and lake intakes, as well as surface water infiltration wells and galleries.
Springs are usually the easiest and comparably low cost way of accessing groundwater when it is possible as construction costs are comparably low and no pump is needed.
For water abstraction, gravity water supplies should be used whenever possible, as those are usually low cost and reliable way of abstracting water.
A large variety of pumps are available on the market.
Required pressure, well depth or needed elevation as well as available energy sources usually define which types of pumps are feasible to use.
Clarification combined with disinfection are the conventional ways of treating water not contaminated with geogenic chemicals or chemicals from industry or agriculture.
If water is chemically contaminated it becomes more difficult to manage the problem and reduce contamination level to acceptable values.
Desalination of water is complex and expensive and requires high energy demand and reliable power sources.
If there other water sources, they should be considered first.
Water distribution and transport can be done in various ways ad scales such as delivering water with jerry can from a nearby water source, buying water from water vendors, supplying water with tankers to the areas without access to water sources or through a distribution network.
Although jerry cans are not optimal and recontamination of water is likely, it is still very common in many places.
In case water sources are far or time for collecting water is limited, water vendors might provide a service of delivering water at higher cost to the home.
Tinkering water is still being done in areas without alternatives, although it is costly and can become a logistical nightmare.
It should rather be avoided whenever possible.
Obviously distribution network is the most desired, convenient and safe way of delivering water to consumers.
However it is expensive, complex, requires skills and expertise.
However, rehabilitation of distribution networks becomes more often the daily business in an emergency as conflicts move more to the urban areas and are getting protracted.
When water sources are far or supply intermittent, safe water storage at home becomes crucial to avoid health risks due to recontamination of water.
See you and goodbye.
