Welcome back to part two of this chapter.
Now, we shall continue the introduction of Chapter One by giving you first of all the historical picture of the spectrum of ethanyl as recorded in 1951.
So different isotopes may have different spins.
First of all, there are quite a few isotopes, such as the ubiquitous Carbon 13, which makes up about
99% of organic matter.
And Oxygen 16, also all over the place, have no spin at all, although they have a charged nucleus, of course.
And of course the nucleus may well be spinning around.
Why should it not?
It does not have a spin and so the magnetic quantum number cannot be different, can only be zero and there's no transitions.
One cannot do any NMR at all.
But this is a long series of important nuclei that have a spin one half and that are actually very popular in NMR spectroscopy and also in imaging.
Some nuclei, some isotopes have a spin quantum number equal to one, mostly Deuterium and Nitrogen 14, also Lithium 6.
Some of them have a quantum number three halves.
Typical examples are Boron 11,
Sodium 23, Chlorine 35 and 37.
By the way, sodium can be used in NMR as well.
And then some have the spin five half, such as Oxygen 17 and Aluminum 27 which is actually very interesting to observe, and aluminosilicates.
Finally, some have a spin three.
And there are some exotic examples that go beyond.
Not only do they have spin, but they have different gammas, different gyromagnetic ratios.
So this is the gyromagnetic ratio.
This is an inherent property of the different isotopes and here you can see that they've been given in the proper units of adverse tesla and adverse second.
But that means that if you multiply with a field of 9.4 tesla, such that the proto-NMR frequency appears at 400 MHz, then automatically the
Deuterium NMR frequency appears at about 61 MHz and the Carbon 13 at 100 MHz.
You should remember that there is a factor here of about one quarter and you might also wish to remember that there's a factor of about one-tenth between the proton and the Nitrogen 15 frequency.
So, these frequencies have been given appropriately in a field of B zero equals 9.4 tesla because that in fact is quite routine in the current world of chemistry and physics.
There are many, many spectrometers that operate at 400 MHz because it's reasonably cheap and yet very effective.
Now we also see that the natural abundance of these isotopes varies a great deal.
For example, Deuterium is only found 0.015% in ordinary sea water or in rain water.
So that's not very much and you may wish to enrich it if you want to observe Deuterium.
Carbon 13 is about 1%.
That can be observed directly but, of course, you can boost it by enhancing the population or by labelling the molecules with Carbon 13.
Nitrogen 14 may not be boosted but it's very difficult to observe because it has a very large quadrupole splitting.
As you can see,
Notrogen 14 has spin one.
And this is one of the things we have worked on in Lausanne over the last few years.
Nitrogen 15 is very is very popular in biomolecules because you can introduce it synthetically by cloning techniques into molecules and proteins in particular.
O17 is still challenging.
Fluorine 19 is very popular because it has a very high abundance,
100%, and also because one can find Fluorine 19 in many drug molecules but not in natural living matter.
Silicone 29 is popular for those studying silicates and aluminosilicates.
And phosphorus is very popular in biochemistry because there are many important phosphates moving around in organisms.
So you see, every isotope has a characteristic spin quantum number.
Now, there are some rules about these quantum numbers.
For example, if the number of protons and the number of neutrons are both even, then the resulting spin quantum number is zero.
That is the case for Carbon 12 and for Oxygen 16.
But you can also have the case where both the protons and neutrons appear in odd numbers.
Then we have integer numbers, quantum numbers, such as one, two or three.
They could be even and odd or odd and even and in either case, we have so called half integers spins.
Actually, these rules are not particularly useful.
It is better to look at the full table, like here.
Now the electromagnetic spectrum is very vast.
It ranges from very high frequencies and very short wave lengths to very low frequencies and very long wave lengths.
So in spectroscopy, it is the gamma rays that are used in Mössbauer spectroscopy that have the highest energies.
Higher than x-ray, and high x-rays again are more energetic than ultra-violet and visible.
And then we have the infra-red range and below that the microwave range and much lower yet, we have the radio frequency range.
So this has several consequences.
First of all, the radio frequencies are largely innocuous.
Nobody really worries that when you listen to a transistor radio on the beach, that you might get irradiated by the transmittors or by the receivers, so radio frequency is quite innocuous and that has great advantages for MRI.
Radio frequency also can penetrate through all sorts of tissues including living humans.
Again, you can check with your radio, that it works even if you lie on top of it, and that is the reason why MRI is so popular.
Whereas, with doing imaging of humans with visible light is, of course, very difficult.
Now, NMR actually also had other advantages in that we have a great spread of frequencies and here on a scale where 400MHz would correspond to protons, you see that Fluorine 19 is in the vicinity.
Phosphorous 31 is somewhat below and then the ubiquitous
Carbon 13 appears at about 100 MHz.
But even if we have a high resolution spectrometer that can resolve different chemical shifts, then one can distinguish various types of protons.
So for example, at the top end we have the aldehydic protons at the bottom end aliphatic protons.
Zero actually corresponds by convention to Tetramethylethylene.
And all of this range spends about 4 KHz out of 400 MHz which corresponds to 10 ppm, and indeed that is the common scale used here.
So the frequencies of NMR transitions are typically in the range between 10 and 1,000 MHz.
Incidentally, the world's most powerful machine is indeed 1,000 MHz of protons and you find it at Lyon in France.
Now we shall consider a nucleus with a magnetic moment µ, so this is a magnetic moment, immersed in a magnetic field B.
We can arrange this magnetic field so that it's parallel to the X-axis or if you prefer, we can just align the Z-axis of our co-ordinate system with a field.
In that case, all we have to worry about is the product of the Z component of the magnetic moment and the amplitude of the field.
It turns out that this Z component is determined by the product of M.
That's the magnetic quantum number.
H-bar, that's Planck constant divided by 2 pi.
Gamma, the gyromagnetic ratio and the amplitude of the field.
Remember that this M here can be plus or minus one half if i equal one half, so if I equal one half, it follows that m is either plus or minus one half.
Now the splitting in energy can be described as simply
H-bar times the absolute value of Gamma times B.
And the NMR frequency is the same as the splitting divided by H-bar, by H, so that we have simply this divided by two pi.
Now for a spin one half as I said, we have either m equal plus one half and we call this the alpha level, or we have m equal minus one half and we call this the beta level and we have a single transition.
So this is the case for a spin one half.
But if we have a spin one, such as for a neutron or also for Nitrogen 14, then we have three possibilities.
We have m, either minus one or zero, or plus one, and indeed we have three different levels.
It turns out that the obvious nomenclature alpha beta gamma is not common in our business, so we just use these quantum numbers.
And we notice that if this spin could be a deterium or Nitrogen 14, is disolved in an isotropic liquid, then in fact it turns out that the two, the energy splitting between the top and the middle level is exactly the same as the energy splitting between the middle and bottom level.
So these true transitions are degenerate.
So when we see a line like this, it actually half of it comes from the top transition and half from the bottom transition.
Whereas in this case, for protons, for example, there is really only one transition.
So let's attempt to summarize the main points of the introductory chapter.
First of all, every isotope in the periodic table has a characteristic spin quantum number i.
Some isotopes have i = 0, in which case it is just impossible to do NMR.
This is the case for Carbon 12 and the only way to rescue the situation is by replacing the Carbon 12 with the Carbon 13.
Now every isotope with i different from zero has a characteristic magnetic moment µ.
Nuclear spins have 2i + 1 distinct energy levels and these energy levels are labelled by magnetic quantum numbers, lower case m, which can vary from minus i to plus i in steps of one.
In a magnetic field, the energy levels are split by an amount that is proportional to the size of the nuclear magnetic moment and to the strength of the magnetic field.
So NMR spectroscopy uses electromagnetic radiation to induce transitions between energy levels.
The frequencies of NMR transitions are typically in the range between 10 and 1,000 MHz.
The intensities of NMR signals depend on the differences in the populations of the energy levels.
These populations are determined by Boltzmann law and by the temperature, and by the field and by the gyromagnetic ratio and all of these parameters conspire to make NMR a rather insensitive technique and this is in fact the Achilles heel of NMR, is that one often needs very concentrated samples or very long experimental times to get decent signals, sufficient information.
And this is one of the driving problems why so many NMR spectroscopists are trying to improve the methods.
Thank you.
