I'm pleased to be able to introduce students from around the world to an innovative new approach to learning on key issues in global health.
This project is a unique approach through a massive online course or MOOC for short.
Initiated by WHO Special Program for Research and Training in
Tropical Diseases which has been a pivotal resource in many areas of research on tropical infectious diseases through its support for research and capacity strengthening over the past forty years.
WHO has defined the strategies for the control of these diseases and created ambitious targets in a road-map.
However, whilst interventions are available, which we've implemented would ensure that the targets are met, most programs face challenges which can be categorized as biological, such as the emergence of drug or insecticide resistance, or socio-economic challenges migration, disruptions of programs due to security issues and conflict or resource based pressures, all of which or a combination of them can derail those strategies.
In addition, as new products emerge, they require to be validated and subjected to rigorous scrutiny, before WHO can recommend to countries that they can be implemented at scale.
The objective of this course is to highlight the role of implementation research as a critical path of validating the evidence to improve interventions.
The course has chosen diverse sets of conditions which are of significant public health importance and which will continue to require well trained and well equipped health staff, to implement programs in endemic countries and to be up to date in the current thinking, and also how the recommended strategies have emerged. 
The details of these studies are elegantly described in the MOOC providing as it does access to introductory videos and to detailed protocols for malaria treatment for the home based management in malaria.
The quality of the materials available in the different media is outstanding based on many years of experience by the authors which highlight the environments in which the implementation itself is carried out, the need for collaborative studies the engagement of many different disciplines, from clinical sciences epidemiology, entomology, to social sciences, all essential elements to successful implementation research.
The course emphasizes the importance of, not only of community based approaches to the control of disease, but also the importance of recognizing the role of the health systems in providing the resources to ensure the products reach populations at the end of the road.
One of the most significant and understated benefits described from the work undertaken on the community directed treatment was a figure that some fifty percent of treatments for river blindness reach communities at least twenty kilomnters from any health facility.
This emphasizes the importance of community directed treatments and ensuring products reach the people who most need them.
The MOOC will provide the students with access to the best available materials, creating a journey which is an exemplar of enlightening stories of applied science.
I hope those who are embarking on this venture into a new approach to learning will be inspired by the material, thus demonstrating that such research is a fundamental component of progress in our attempt to achieve the health targets of the Sustainable Development Goals.
