Hi, I'm Pascal Allotey, professor of public health at the Jeffrey Cheah School of
Medicine and Health Sciences
Monash University Malaysia.
Welcome to this Massive Online Open
Course on implementation research.
There is significant financial investment in the development of tools and interventions to tackle some of the major public health challenges, particularly in diseases of poverty,
There are also funding schemes to address grand challenges of our time towards vaccine development and other innovations that will tackle the causes of diseases and ill health.
But an ongoing challenge for which the current evidence base remains thin, is how to ensure that these solutions, tools, interventions, etc. get to the people who need them and are used in a manner that results in the outcome for which they were intended.
In the absence of effective implementation strategies, the usefulness of otherwise effective solutions is severely curtailed, and yet the importance of implementation research is often underestimated, and it is not considered a core part of the research pipeline.
This Massive Online Open Course, or MOOC, on implementation research provides an ideal opportunity for you to come to grips with implementation research with the expectation that by the end of the course, you will be able to design your own implementation research projects, critically evaluate and use the evidence produced by other implementation research projects, commission robustly designed implementation research projects and all of this with the ultimate goal of enhancing the evidence base of effective ways to improve the heath of the populations we serve.
The first step for you is to take the brief introduction to using the MOOC platform.
This introduces you on how to access the content and resources available on the platform, how to enroll, how to take various assessments and how to get the most out of the learning opportunities through discussion fora with others taking the course.
Once this is done, you will have access to some of the leading experts from around the world, who will take you step by step through the core concepts in implementation research identifying the challenges of various contexts, how to assess the appropriateness of existing strategies how to develop new innovations and strategies by working with communities and stakeholders, specifying your implementation research question, operationalising your variables, and designing rigorous research projects.
You'll also learn how to identify your implementation research outcomes and evaluate the effectiveness of your implementation research strategy.
Finally you will learn how to plan the scale-up of your intervention given a robust implementation strategy.
Of course, the research pipeline does not end there and you'll need to have established the mechanisms for ongoing monitoring to determine when your intervention is sustained within the population or where appropriate when the disease is eliminated.
The course is enriched by several case studies of projects that have succeeded and also examples of failures and why.
You will also have the opportunity to hear from senior level policy makers at the national and international level.
And critically the materials have been put together by several eminent people in the field.
Professor Oladele Akogun, and professor Hans Remme take you through module one.
Professor William Brieger, and professor Uche Amazigo run through module two, and explain how to address the challenges of understanding and working within diverse contexts.
Professor Maria Rosário Martins, doctor Neal Alexander and doctor Jorge Arroz will take you through module three on the design of implementation strategies and research approaches required to ensure robust evidence to justify the implementation approach.
In module four, doctor
Olakunle Alonge and doctor Vivian Go provide a detailed explanation of how to evaluate implementation research  by clearly articulating appropriate implementation research outcomes.
And finally in module five, doctor Paul Milligan and doctor
Corine Merle, bring together the core issues across the four modules and demonstrate how the principles work in practice and support scaling up of interventions.
Your learning will be supported through informative and summative assessments and opportunities to engage with your cohort through discussion forum.
There are also a wide range of resources provided for you as supplementary and reference text for the course and for your future work as implementation researchers.
Many of these have been compiled or commissioned by TDR.
The project of this MOOC involved a large team of experts, credited in the and was coordinated by professor Pascal Launois and Edith Certain.
We sincerely hope you enjoy the course and take some time when it's over to let us know what worked and what can be done better.
And we look forward to the potential to work with you on your implementation research projects once the course is completed.
Thank you.
