<i>What is implementation research?</i>
<i>This is the question that is addressed by the first of 5 modules</i>
<i>of this Massive Open 
Online Course</i>
<i>developed by the Special Program for Research and Training</i>
<i>in Tropical Diseases.</i>
Hello. My name is Pascale Allotey.
I am the professor of public health, and I lead a global public health research group at the Monash University campus in Malaysia.
It is an absolute delight for me to be able to introduce this first module of the 5 modules on implementation research.
Implementation research is actually carried out across a range of disciplines and as a result of that, there are several definitions available for it.
Now regardless of discipline or definition, the underlying concept is usually the same.
In public health, we usually start off with a significant health problem within the population.
On the other hand, there are efficacious proven interventions that can help to address the health problem.
However, there are implementation problems.
The implementation problems are those problems that make it difficult for the intervention to get to those who need it because of the complexities of poverty, of poor access to health, and so on.
And this is the role of implementation research.
It helps us to define and identify the various mechanisms that will help to provide the solutions to the implementation problems.
And therefore reduce the health problem.
This first module that addresses the definition of implementation research is divided into 3 chapters.
The first chapter addresses the problems and the promise.
The promise being the intervention that is available to address the problem.
And it uses real life case examples that begin to illustrate what the problems are with implementation.
The 2nd chapter looks at specific implementation research cases, again, that begin to get you thinking about the nature of implementation research.
Those first 2 chapters are introduced to you by Professor Oladele Akogun from Nigeria.
The 3rd and final chapter in this module takes us through the theoretical and conceptual areas that we need to think about in designing and carrying out an implementation research project.
That 3rd chapter is introduced to you by Doctor Hans Remme.
This module is focused largely on, the cases that we use, are focused largely on infectious diseases of poverty.
But we would hope that you can see through these examples how you can apply these concepts of implementation research to any other health problem that you might be addressing.
By the end of this module,
We would hope that you would be able to describe the scope, the relevance, and the key characteristics of implementation research.
We would also hope that you would be able to identify the range of areas for application of implementation research regardless of the context in which you have to work or the health intervention that you are having to deal with.
The course has been put together with some really exciting, real life cases, and we really hope you enjoy it.
Thank you.
