Hi, it's Oladele again.
Still talking about implementation research in module 1 and describing what implementation research is.
In this chapter, which is chapter 2, will be discussing how implementation research lives up to the promise.
In this chapter, we shall discuss home management of malaria and community based interventions which are two illustrative examples of implementation research.
We start with the home management of malaria.
Due to lack of access to health facility most malaria episodes are first managed at home.
Using medicines that are purchased from itinerant vendors are from local shops like this one.
Treatment delays in current treatment poor quality drugs are common, leading to poor management outcome of malaria.
Sadly, many children die within 48 hours of the onset of the symptom of malaria.
The prompt use of effective anti-malaria medicines close to the home, helps to alleviate this unpleasant consequence brought about by lack of access.
In the 1990s,
TDR studies showed that adherence to treatment improves when malaria is pre-packaged in unit doses, such as this.
Quality of treatment also improves when trained community-based providers are responsible for service delivery close to the home.
The drastic reduction in child mortality due to malaria is clearly demonstrated in Burkina Faso and Ethiopia, when this approach of pre-packaged anti-malaria was used and community-based providers were trained on how to deliver this and this.
Let us now discuss how this research was carried out.
Come with me.
Although all these studies that were done on home management of malaria were separately conducted, they have all the attributes of the implementation research and they had research teams that were multidisciplinary.
Like in any implementation research, the study objective was clearly defined.
In this case of home management of malaria, the study objective was to test its strategy for prompt and appropriate home management of fevers in children.
The specific objectives were also clearly stated. In this case the operational feasibility of delivery of pre-packaged drugs.
The drug of choice at that time was chloroquine.
Another specific objective was a caregiver compliance with treatment resolutions.
The research team were interested in assessing that.
Other objective that they had, which is typical of implementation research, is community attitude with respect to pre-packaged anti-malaria drugs which would be new when tested.
Overall, the proportion of children receiving prompt and appropriate treatment for febrile illnesses would be measured.
This one objective that all the teams working separately in different countries had.
The operational feasibility of the strategy for home management of malaria was reported.
The researchers found that it was operationally feasible and they give reasons for that.
One, the methods of selection of the committee distributors of every pre-packaged drugs was important aspect to the operational feasibility.
They noted that the community members that took part in treating and managing malaria at the comunity level saw it as a personal service to the community.
They've saw themselves as particularly responsible and this was well-captured during the implementation research.
Implementation research will not let these types of reporting go by unnoticed.
Community attitude is one of the main objectives of the study.
The home management of malaria studies indicated that the community are very happy with the pre-packaged drugs.
One, the drugs were available when required within the community, on a very short distance. they didn't need to travel too far to access the drug.
So accessibility problem was immediately solved.
And the availability issue was also solved.
Unlike what they are used to; where they have to travel long distances to access drugs that one was removed.
Availability issue was also removed.
It was also found very simple and culturally very acceptable to them.
The messages, teaching them how to use the drugs that were packaged and information, educational and communication messages, there were also very acceptable to the community.
On the other hand, the community distributors had to fill new forms and often they are not very happy with that.
Most community distributors and the players, the service provider at the community level just want to get the job done.
They want to give the intervention to community member.
They required them as they were trained.
The additional work of filling out forms, pads are usually found very bothersome for them and that usually is the reason most of them ask for incentives.
In other 4 countries there was an appreciable improvement in the proportion of children that actually receive prompt and appropriate treatment with the pre-packaged drug for the management of malaria, a major objective of the study.
As the result of these studies, which were actually based on chloroquine, now extinct, home management of malaria became a policy in many countries.
Many countries have adopted the home management approach and they are using it for Artemisinin-based combination therapy.
Many manuals have been produced to support home management of malaria.
This demonstrates how implementation research moves from the concept of identifying the implementation problem using research to solve that problem and ensuring that they're some uptake of the findings into policy which is use to improve the quality of implementation by removing the initial hindrance to the use of efficacious interventions.
You will recall that the study started as a strategy for improving the uptake of chloroquine using pre-packaged chloroquine medicines.
Soon after this was proven to be feasible, operationally feasible, acceptable at the community level and scaling up has been done.
There was a change from chloroquine to Artemisinin combination therapy; a new drug.
So implementation research had to come in as well and implementation research was used to test.
Will the same strategy that was used for chloroquine be feasible, acceptable and will it be effective for Artemisinin combination therapy?
That was proven to be yes, it was feasible.
The excitement following that, led to: could we use the same strategy of home and community management strategy? could we use it for identifying and managing pneumonia, which is another childhood illness?
So implementation research was used to test that.
And lastly, rapid diagnostic test kit were incorporated to the management of malaria. with it, that could be evidence-based malarial management; which use to be done in the healthcare facility.
And the question was, could community members use the rapid diagnostic test kit to identify malaria and then be able to refer non-malaria cases to the health facility?
It was implementation research that was called upon to answer that question.
So the evolution has systematically moved from pre-packaged chloroquine to the use of rapid diagnostic test kit for evidence-based fever management.
That’s typical of implementation research always evolving.
Thank you for listening.
We go to the next one, where we will be discussing another implementation research example with community-directed intervention
Thank you for listening but don't go away, let's go to community-directed intervention.
Thank you.
