Hello. I'm Hans Remme and I'm taking you through this final chapter of concepts and scope of implementation research.
Professor Akogun has shown you several examples of implementation problems, and implementation research projects. and what we'll do now is take a step back and take a more theoretical look at implementation research.
We'll talk about what implementation is, definitions of implementation research, different phases in implementations project, how implementation research fits in overall research landscape, and finally the importance and possible impact in implementation research in the area of health.
So to start, I'd like to take you back to a diagram the professor Alottey showed at the beginning of the course.
This is a simple diagram of the basic concept of implementation research showing a significant health problem and efficacious intervention that could have a major impact on the health problem but doesn't, because of implementation problems.
Implementation research focuses on those problems; not on the intervention, not on the health problem but trying to tackle the problem that the intervention doesn't reach the health problem and doesn't have the desired impact.
Implementation research tries to understand the problem, the reasons for it and particularly trying to develop a solution that will overcome the problem.
That is the major focus of implementation research developing effective solutions for implementation problems.
So let's now try to put the diagram into words.
Implementation research addresses health interventions, proven health interventions that do not have the expected impact because of implementation problems; and we can differentiate two types of interventions.
Interventions that have been on a long way, a long time around and for which the implementation problem has been around for a long time. they maybe increasingly being tackled by implementations research and an example for that is for malaria; what professor Akogun showed
The example of malaria, where the availability of anti-malarials, effective anti-malarials, did not prevent hundreds of thousands children to die. because of malaria, because they did not get the adequate treatment in time a major implementation problem, that was tackled by the home management of malaria strategy.
And there are interventions which are new, just coming down of the research pipeline, but it can already be anticipated that it will be major implementation challenges.
For instance, ivermectin became available for Onchocerciasis.
There was no intervention for most of Africa before that and suddenly there was an opportunity and need to cover and treat a hundred and sixty million people all over Africa in very difficult situations with poor functioning health systems.
How to do that, how to ensure sustained annual treatment?
Implementation just came in, and you know the results of the community-directed treatment, strategy was very effective.
Another example was shown for Tunisia contains leishmaniasis; where mechanical plowing was effective in removing the intermediate host in the transmission cycle.
But, scaling up mechanical plowing ran into  multisectoral challenges.
Communities, health systems, ministries, everybody had obstacles and problems; so implementation research was critically needed to see how to tackle this systematically so that intervention could be up-scaled.
So that's what implementation research does, going in trying to identify and investigate these problems that prevent effective implementation, so detailed research to study  how important problems are, and what really causes them, and try to develop and test implementation strategies that provide solutions to these implementation problems.
As we said before, the ultimate aim, the focus of IR, is to develop evidence-based solutions that can be applied at scale.
In implementing research, three key phases can be distinguished.
The first phase is about defining that implementation problem, understanding it better, investigating it and taking into account the specific local settings and context.
Very often, implementation problems are very setting specific say for, malaria, had all these of directly being close to home. well that depends on how vital and how effective the local health system is and how close it gets to the home,
Their issues of perception of malaria and perception of the effectiveness of drugs or local treatments  can highly vary between areas, and so on.
So you have to understand and notice different context and also, - that's the second major point in this phase - understand the reasons of the problem.
Why do we have it in this particular case?
And generate information on possible solutions.
That's easily said that done.
In the beginning, we don't know what solutions  we are looking for so that will require some exploratory research.
Module two of this course, we'll discuss in further detail the issue of many various settings of implementation research and how to identify the implementation problems and generate information on possible solutions.
The second phase, and a very difficult and important one, is to design implementation strategies.
This is usually done by brainstorming based on evidence and information collected in the research in the phase one of the study. all the data of the problem and all relevant related factors and possible solutions where ideas about solutions, emerging from the date collected at the phase one; but at the same time also, they carefully review the scientific literature.
Whenever the first to look into an issue with a lot of relevant information in the literature, sometimes already ready implementation strategies being proposed, or sometimes ideas which may lead to idea, suggestions how to tackle it in this particular situation.
And based on that, you're trying to design in improved implementation strategy based on what you have learned from the data and what you think may work in that specific situation; strategies that have potential to overcome the implementation problem in this type of settings.
Module three of this course on implementations research; we'll go in greater detail about the question of defining research questions and developing implementation strategies and thus, indication  of the type of research methodologies that should be applied.
Once and potentially new and more effective strategy has been developed, it will be tested in real life settings.
That is often a very complex large scale research because of the real life setting means really the whole social context in different areas. and we're then going to look specifically what this new intervention does in terms of achieving; what we call implementation research outcomes.
We want to asses the effectiveness of the implementation in achieving and solution to the implementation problem, removing the implementation problem so that intervention can reach the health problem.
We're not really immediately dropping here about effect on the disease; it is getting intervention to the disease. getting things implemented, that's the essential focus of implementation research.
And then, in the end we compare the effectiveness of what we have tried out, a new proposed strategy and the old one. and based on those conclusions, we will know if we can recommend to implement a large scale implication of this strategy.
Module four of this course in implementation research will go into detail on the issue of implementation research outcomes and how to measure them.
Now that we have defined what the implementation research is, let's see how it fits in the overall research landscape and specifically in the research pipeline for new interventions.
Implementation research is preceded by intervention research; this is to develop and test efficacious interventions. it's testing is usually done in very controlled trials and randomized control trials.
It is different from implementation research because it's really about focusing on the intervention, not orient on the implementation. but intervention research and implementation research are very often confused. I hope you won't confuse any more after this course.
Following implementation research we have a type of research we call effectiveness research to assess the effects, the impact of the disease, the intervention on the disease in question and the real life conditions.
Now, the implementation research is about getting implementation and intervention implemented in real life.
Implementation research and effectiveness research are very closely associated; and often people want to combine them in one research project.
Sometimes it can be done, sometimes it's not a good idea because the methodology required and the type of research and research scope may be very different between those two.
However, if you do it, be careful and be always clear that you have two different research methodologies and research objectives, and don't mix the two up.
At the same level of implementation research, we have other research areas also concerned with implementation to some extent.
Operational research solving operational problems of local health problems very focused.
And health system research looking at performance at the health system as a whole.
Wider system focus.
The borders between those different areas are not clearly defined; there's a lot of overlap. it doesn't matter as long. if you do any of this research, be clear what your objective is and what you're trying to achieve.
Then there is a number of key characteristics of IR that I would like to discuss.
First of all, IR is complex.
And complexity at different levels, first of all the problems that we're are dealing with tend to be complex because they're multi-factorial problems. there are all different reasons why something doesn't work like for malaria, or maybe it is that a whole local health systems not functioning, or people have no belief locally in the new drugs or they give preference to traditional medicine approaches,  or there are some major problem locally of understanding of what causes malaria and what you can do about it.
So, the many, many factors, and therefore a very complex kind of research is required.
Therefore, we bring in multi-disciplinary teams. we need to look at all the different aspects of the problem and the possible solutions.
And so for the CDI study, there was a big group of epidemiologists, social behavioral scientists, health economists statisticians and other managers and these were all required to answer the overall question, complex question of CDI.
Multi-sectorial research, we've seen example in Tunisia, and of course come back in many of the other studies that we were addressing.
Others are multi-center and multi-country studies. the aim in implementation research is to develop solutions that can be applied at scale, but different situations have different types of modifications of the problem so there's often a question, can we really scale this up?
That's why multi-center studies are important that you do the same study in different places with quite different local settings and conditions. and if you get generally the same answer coming back we have more confidence that your intervention is really applicable over wider scale.
On the other hand, if different variations come up which are fundamentally important, and in some places, prevent the achievement of the implementation then your strategy is not up-scalable and you need adaptations to be developed for different areas.
So, to get the scale, multi-center studies are very important.
Focus, as we said it before, is about its research.
We're trying to get new knowledge and new solutions. research is about innovation and that's certainly what implementations is also about.
It's not routine monitoring and evaluation; this is very important for all health programs, but that's not research.
The main aim of implementation research is to find an improvement and that requires innovation.
For scale-up, already mentioned to it and of course, sustainability is another major issue with implementation research focuses on, because no use to solve a problem if it comes back after two years time.
We need sustainable solutions.
The third "multi" is the actors involved.
Many different actors play a role in implementation research. they are critical for it and particularly highlight the importance of involving the ministry of health, personnel and disease control managers already up front in the study in the defining of the research question and the design of the study.
It's critically important that their concerns are taken into account and that they stay a part of process to make sure whatever the research does provides answers to what they need, provides the information they need so that they can implement the solution and bring it to scale.
Endemic country researches, especially in this research, they should play a lead role.
They understand the local situation they understand how populations will react, and how health systems and different levels of the community will respond to different possible approaches and therefore are critical in the interpretation of different results. but also in the best position to take the research findings back and communicate this to the different partners and ministries of health and other decision makers for large scale impact.
And finally, we have seen it in the several examples, we've shown ownership of the end-users. and what in those studies, we've shown you the examples of what's particularly important was the community. they were the key powers to finally implement a solution; so they were critical players in this whole process.
There is remaining challenges in implementation research and some major ones are that the IR is new.
People are not familiar with it, in fact there's a lot of confusion about what the implementation research is, and that's one of the reasons why we're having this course.
It's also not recognized often in the disease control environment.
People might say:
"Well, we have to do things."
"We have to implement it, we need funding, we need more vehicles."
"That's our issue, not more research."
So, there's some confliction to be done up front to make clear what contribution of implementation research can be.
We see clearly that in areas where implementation research has worked and has produced effective results, disease control managers and health ministry of health staff become much more interested because they can see they can benefit for their work.
Then we have an issue, where you do the research and implement implementation research, of keeping research and implementation separate.
Testing a new implementation strategy in real life setting is complex and requires a lot of support to get it going.
But we must make sure that there's no interference with our ability to assess how this intervention would work in real life without researchers being around.
So we need an arm length distance all the time between the research activities , the evaluation activities, and what would not be otherwise available in the real life implication in the future.
Multi-factorial processes, keeping complex multi-disciplinary research focused and manageable.
I think by now, we got the message that implementation research can be highly complex. and since we are addressing so many different factors and settings and so on, there's a tendency where you start doing the studies to go into everything, to try to study everything and try to study all possible issues that could be related and you may soon drift off in all directions and become not manageable any more.
Critical way for running an IR project is to have a very well defined, very clear objective and always try to focus on that and limit your activities to that.
Collect data which can contribute to the question. don't go beyond that because you just get a massive amount of information which will decrease your ability to understand what really is happening and what you need to do.
Generalizeable solutions.
We want to stay adaptable to local circumstances, and I've discussed this now, but it's clearly a major challenge in implementation research, and we have to be creative to do that.
And finally, we said we want to go beyond just evaluation; we are doing research about new solutions.
Finally, something about the importance of implementation research.
The very obvious and immediate benefit is of course overcoming the bottleneck; the implementation bottleneck; so that we can have a major health impact that the intervention possibly could achieve.
So immediate effect of implementation research, enormous impact on health, sometimes really very significantly.
Secondly is that we have now implementation strategies which are not so based on guess work or expert opinion but really based on evidence. and I think that's an important step forward in health and an area we're going increasingly towards evidence based health interventions.
Since it's evidence based there's also more consensus of what it is about on the best implementation strategy to use.
It gives us also improved knowledge and understanding of the key factors and causing implementation problems, that we read broader understanding of the issues in implementation, increasing our general evidence based and being helpful for new research in other areas.
And finally it fills the critical gap in the research pipeline.
A gap that shouldn't have been in the first place and that we're now trying to fill.
The research pipeline and the implementation pipeline have to be made to meet up; and that new interventions can properly flow into implementation.
So we've come to the end of this chapter and we conclude that implementation research for infectious diseases of poverty aims to develop effective implementation strategies for available efficacious interventions.
And we say that it's about time, because this gap in the research pipeline needs to be filled, needs to be closed.
And we very much hope that after this course you will be coming to help us instead.
Thank you very much.
