In this video we will examine the question of transport and mobility, once again not in an exhaustive way, but just enough to help us in our urban planning, to help us to understand how this works.
When we speak of transport, we speak of a transportation system, and this system is made up of three elements, which are:
One, the services, the trams, trains, buses, taxis, but also the police, who are part of this service.
Next we have the infrastructures, the routes, the railways, parking lots, and one has a network of users, which are the pedestrians, drivers, the cyclists, the road-users, as well as the mini-bus companies.
This network is made up of these three elements.
On the question of mobility, it is above all a necessity.
We need to be able to go to work, to go to recreational activities, to go to the market.
It is above all a necessity, but it is equally a right.
One has the right to be able to get around, its opposite would make one a prisoner.
What we take of this is, above all, is this right to mobility.
Even if I exercise this right only partially, even if I don't use it at all, mobility is a right.
To continue, since we will deal principally with public transport in this question of transport and mobility, a quote from the mayor of Bogotá, the ex-mayor of 
Bogotá, who said,
"A developed country is not a place where the poor have cars.
It's where the rich use public transportation."
We'll use this as a starting point for our discussion,
Used as a base for our discussion and of particular interest is that today, if we look at the major trends in Africa, we'll see that the principal trend lies in the increased number of cars.
So the rate of car ownership increases, slowly but surely, in the majority of cities, and in some very rapidly.
The margin, since car ownership rates are very, very low, at this point, the margin is still excessively large.
Along with this increase in cars, we see a decrease in public transportation, in walking and cycling, in nearly all African cities.
And suddenly, as everywhere, we find a diminishing attractiveness of city centers, because it is difficult to get to them, so ultimately it is the periphery which wins, the diffuse periphery where one can fit the most vehicles, and where the distance from point A to point B is the longest.
So there you have the actual trends, and it is here where we should begin our plans, and to try to understand what the possible means might be to achieve eventual change.
So let's look at the impact on the land, for each line, each route, each space given over to transport, whether private or public, has an impact on the land, and its effect, for a strip of 
3.5 meters in length, the example we have here, we'll note it somewhere, can surpass 2,000 people if it's in mixed traffic, or if in suburban railways, 
100,000 people.
So we can see that this gap is excessively large, and that in the end it will have a huge influence on the form of the city, and a very large impact on the land, whether one chooses one mode of transport or another.
Walking, as we just said, we see that in certain cities can reach 70%, while globally more than 50% of travel in African cities is on foot.
So what is the reason behind this downward trend?
Because the city grows outward, and distances are greater to travel.
The modal split, we'll see later on that this is the model, but we can clearly see that it is the distribution between the different types of transport, between the private car, the bike, walking, public transportation.
And we will find extremely different situations when it comes to each city.
In Johannesburg, the role of the car is huge, while in Douala or Dar es Salaam, it is very small.
The role of informal transport is huge in Accra, yet in Douala it is very small when compared to other cities.
So we will see that there is not one model of the African city, but that if we use several examples we'll find that there are already exceedingly different modal situations.
There is a direct link between the morphology of the city, between its urban form, but also between its history, its trajectory, or in certain numbers of choices made or not.
Within the schematic we can see the number of private vehicles as a percentage of travel, as a function of the gross domestic product, in dollars, for each of these cities, for each country.
And we have here the American cities based exclusively on the car, and then we have 
European cities which are cities based slightly less on cars but have the tendency to become more and more so, to Americanize themselves and then we have here some developing cities where one has at the same time modal parts of private vehicles relatively weak for some, yet with gross national products which are very weak.
So the challenge here is to figure out if this group will end up here or there.
So we see a significant margin today, notably within African cities.
The schematic of Newman and 
Kenworthy which we've already seen shows the annual gas consumption in relation to urban density.
The more dense my city, the less gas I consume, and this gives us some direction on how it is done.
And, finally, we'll just touch on the question of modal choice.
The modal choice is that, for each time you go out, you'll ask yourself which mode of transportation you'll use.
Now some don't even ask themselves; they have a car, they have the means to have a car and use it exclusively, all the time, and others who on the contrary do ask themselves--
Will I take my bike? Will I walk?
Will I take the bus, or will I go in my car?
And these modal choices will depend on a certain number of criteria, factors, we might say, which include travel time, distance, what 
I need to transport, for example, if I have a large bag will I walk or take my car?
There will also be physical questions.
Am I in good enough shape to walk or bike, or must I take the car?
The cost issue, certainly not negligible, will often be considered when it comes to public transportation, rarely the cost of the car, while there will be other considerations, like parking.
If I take my car, will a parking spot be available?
Also other questions tied to security, for example,
I'd like to walk, but it's dangerous.
It's dangerous because it is on the highway, or because there is a real safety issue.
Thus my modal choice will be influenced as well by safety issues.
So we've touched briefly on the question of modal choice.
Some examples, of taxis, here, in the center of the city.
Mini-buses, which await passengers.
A taxi, a mini-bus; here we are in Dakar.
The same mini-bus which awaits clients, still in Dakar.
Or here, in Abidjan, the large buses which travel longer distances, whose stops are preplanned and known in advance.
Taxis, facing difficulties in the rainy season.
Another type of station, with buses, this time, which travel to neighboring cities or even cross several countries.
So to summarize a bit, we must keep something very important in mind. which is that the mode of transport has a considerable influence on the place where it is used.
The second thing to remember is that today, the role of the car in 
African cities is very small.
It is growing, trending upwards as we've seen, but there still exists a choice between on the one hand a model which will be more 
American, or more European, or without a doubt a third model, which will be clearly African.
Now that we are aware of these different aspects, we will integrate them in our future planning.
What type of city?
Shall I make a city for the car, or for the pedestrian?
Or perhaps for public transportation?
These are the questions we'll address next.
