Welcome back to week three 
Entrepreneurial Marketing.
Today we are going to talk about crowdfunding.
And crowdfunding you might say is more of a financial tool to raise funds but in fact it's also an important marketing channel for your venture.
We'll do this one together today.
We're going to do this one together but next you're going to talk about--
I'll talk about the financial aspects of crowdfunding.
So what we want to introduce to you is in a way the mechanics of crowdfunding from a marketing perspective today.
Highlight to you some examples that were pretty successful using the marketing side of crowdfunding and going to show you these possibilities in more detail.
Let's look at this crowdfunding more systematically.
(Chris) So there's the crowdfunding platform and that's usually some kind of internet platform that the entrepreneur uses to reach the crowd.
And who is the crowd?
We'll talk a little bit about the composition of the crowd but think of the crowd as being the general public.
It could be anybody.
It does not have to be a financial, professional--
(Mark) Whoever visits the crowdfunding platform.
The target segments that you might want to address is part of this crowd hopefully but it's not necessarily only your targets that reach you.
(Chris) Right and then the entrepreneur is going to communicate to the crowd the information about the project.
So they're going to give specific details about what they're working on and what they want to do.
Plus may offer some rewards.
The rewards are going to be access to the first prototype, beta-tester, lunch with the founder--
(Mark) Which could be fun!
(Chris) It could be a lot of fun.
Or any other sort of rewards.
(Mark) Exactly and then we have some examples later on that give you some orientation of what these rewards could be.
In return, the entrepreneur hopefully gets some seed funding that will be next week's conversation with Chris about the financial aspects.
Important non-financial resources like getting access to customers, getting the attention of the customers, getting the product off the ground and these are important non-financial resources that are vital to the new venture creation process because you need customers ultimately.
We talked about this a couple of times during this week's segment already.
So let's look at how crowdfunding works in much more detail.
So let's talk about the non-financial aspects of crowdfunding platforms.
As we mentioned, it's a new channel for raising money and marketing, testing, validating your idea.
So the first thing of course is it's a way of getting your ideas out there and to see how people interact with you: investor behavior.
The investors, again, are the people who are backing the venture and it helps you build a list of those backers.
It also allows you to build some relationships with them, discover, engage, interact with these new customers and build some brand recognition.
Allows you to do a follow up after a soft-launch.
A soft-launch might be sort of a pre-release into the market that you use only with your backers and then they will then turn around and spread the word or it could be used to get growth at the very beginning to offer discounts on the new products, on the current products to get access to the prototypes and therefore allowing you to reach a much bigger market.
(Mark) Let's give you some more intuition of what this could do to your venture and there are two very nice examples that we think are quite instructive.
(Chris) We have some links for these two videos you can watch.
(Mark) Exactly, so you just press on them and look at them.
It's three minutes each but it's quite instructive because they are wonderful examples and two terrific examples that tell you the whole range of possibilities there that can be achieved by crowdfunding.
So "Meow Parlour" in New York City, it's actually a hybrid sort of idea, 
I would say.
These guys have set up a parlour where there are homeless cats and you can go there and you can pet the cat, adopt the cat, and you can have coffee and then some pastries next to it.
(Chris) I think they may even feed the cat some of the--
I'm not really sure how that works.
(Mark) This cat is not fat.
It is not Garfield yet.
And then there is another example more of the high-tech arena, it's the Pebble Watch and it's a new watch.
It's an e-paper watch and these guys have decided that it communicates with the iPhone or with the Android device, exactly and you can even design it yourself, etc. etc.
So they wanted to raise $100,000 and how much did they get?
(Chris) Over $10 million.
I think this was supposed to be the first smart watch that was available cross platform.
(Mark) That was 2012.
The major effect that just bringing them on the market this year.
So 2015.
In that sense, I think these two examples show the range of projects that you will find on a crowdfunding platform.
And let's look at those range of products next in more detail.
(Chris) This is a graphic of the kinds of players you have and what we wanted to say here was the roles are constantly changing here.
I mean we have entrepreneurs, people founding and running businesses.
We have makers, people who are using 3D printing and other kind of do-it-yourself people--
(Mark) Maybe even carpenters, you know, lots of hobbyists.
(Chris) Artists who are basically similar to makers but maybe on the more creative arts side, fine arts.
Then we have fans, which could be fans of any of the above or could be fans of crowdfunding because there are people out there who just like crowdfunding.
They like to participate in different projects.
(Mark) They are entertained by looking at all these proposals and saying, "Okay, I particularly like this proposal here and I can invest in that proposal and see how it develops over time."
So it's an exciting way of actually engaging in the creation of something new in a way that's a different form of entrepreneurship you could even say.
So if you look at all these players, these could be potential backers, funders of your venture.
(Chris) Right and they also switch around.
So someone may be an entrepreneur seeking funding at one moment and then that same entrepreneur may actually be backing someone else.
So I think it's kind of a fluid crowd and of course you have members of the general public too and your friends on social media, etc.
So there's all kinds of possibilities of people who participate in the crowd.
(Mark) So in that sense when you're an entrepreneur and designing your own crowdfunding campaign, you have to keep in mind that you are actually competing with other folks out there that might not have an entrepreneurial endeavor like you have but they just want to have an artistic proposition to the public or maybe they want to create something for the public.
So in that sense, you are in a very heterogeneous mix of people who try to get the attention from the crowd.
So keep that in mind as well as you're designing a crowdfunding campaign.
(Chris) We'll talk more about the mechanics in this particular module and then again next week we'll talk more about the finance.
(Mark) Exactly.
So we strongly advice you to look at lots and lots of examples on the crowdfunding platforms because you learn in a fun way how this works but you also learn by intuition of how this works.
What you see when you watch the Meow Parlour video is that these guys underestimated the time it takes to get the funds into the company.
It took them two months and they wanted to open their store within that time frame.
So what it means: it could take a lot of time.
So you should budget appropriately.
Also be prepared and have a plan of what to expect and I think by looking at many other crowdfunding campaigns you can get an intuitive feeling of what it actually means to be prepared because there's a [inaudible] of different levels of preparedness in that sense.
Some crowdfunding campaigns are extremely professionally prepared while other are not so prepared and we have in the accompanying material to this [movie] some links to some very good crowdfunding campaigns so you can get ahead start on seeing what a professional crowdfunding campaign is and what might not be such a professional campaign.
Also be realistic in your rewards.
Remember that the watch that we just showed you they needed $100,000 but they got $10 million, which is a wonderful surprise to the upside but they were quite realistic in what they needed for that stage of company development, which was $100,000.
So don't over-exaggerate, don't push the cart too much in that sense because you want to have people looking at your video and say,
"Wow I trust these people. 
They have realistic assumptions."
If you aren't realistic, you won't get the trust and you will not get the support.
And what we've also seen is that it works best for teams.
There should be an engagement of people, other people want to-- the crowd wants to see that you're working together well as a team, that you have a vision, a passion for what you're actually doing.
So from a marketing perspective, the crowdfunding campaign that you're going to develop also in this [movie] we'll help you along with strategic aspects and implementation issues that we discussed the other week.
So when you remember the positioning segmentation,
I think these types of decisions should be made before you engage in a crowdfunding campaign because you want to understand where you are along the lines of how your customers should perceive you, how you want to position yourself with the other companies and this should already be your message that you send out to the crowd, to the public and that's similarly segmentation issues are relevant in this domain because you cannot fulfill any type of wish to anyone out there.
You won't have your segment because if you want to be everything to everyone you're no one to no one.
Nothing to no one.
For instance, just to make this more intuitive it's the brand that you're going to portray to the outside world.
It's not only your product but it's your company's brand.
And then if you come more to the implimentation issues, there are issues regarding your distribution that you need to think of carefully.
There are issues regarding the promotional material and your products, which promotional materials are oftentimes tied to the rewards.
It's about the pricing and then actually the crowdfunding platform allows you to experiment with a number of options.
You can, for instance, set your product at different price levels--
Different rewards.
Some more luxurious version of the product.
Just see how the crowd reacts and what they prefer and who prefers what.
In a way, profiling the crowd and trying to understand what they prefer in terms of your products and then you can try to engage in very thorough customer involvement.
And one of the examples that we have seen before, they're emphasizing how they were working together with customers and learning about their venture and also retaining those customers over time.
So in that sense, there's a lot of marketing elements that are highly relevant in the crowdfunding campaign.
So don't just embark, dive into your crowdfunding campaign just as this but think about it.
Make a strategic plan and in the examples we have provided online for you.
They give you some good intuition of what a professional crowdfunding campaign should be.
So what we're going to do is we're going to give you the opportunity in this course to set up and run your own crowdfunding campaign.
I think that's a wonderful opportunity--
It's a great opportunity and you're going to be able to raise real money and then depending on how it works with the grading at the end we are going to choose some projects to give even more prize money to that will help boost your business at the very beginning.
So we're going to have some different aspects of that.
The next few days we're going to talk about--
We keep the suspense up.
Next week you're going to get the details.
You'll hear about the financing details and this week at some point we're going to also give you a segment on the mechanics of the crowdfunding platform that we're using for the project for this particular course.
Exactly.
This is a great opportunity here for you to raise money for your own business.
So start thinking about it now, as Mark just said, start thinking about it now with these various details because those are going to become useful when you actually run your crowdfunding campaign during this course.
Good luck and we'll see you then in this other segment.
When we'll talk more about the financial aspect.
Perfect.
