Urbanization is a process of multidimensional changes and centuries-old continuums which affect the world even today.
Why multidimensional?
Because the changes are at once spatial, demographic, economic, cultural or even infracultural.
In the chart on the right we can see the rates of urbanization.
For all countries, we can begin with the middle column, the one which most interests us because it shows the current situation, even though it dates back to 2010.
In the entire world we are approximately 52% urban.
This means that one of every two people who lives on the Earth lives in a city.
Africa and Asia are two continents with extremely low levels of urbanization, a bit behind when compared to others.
And the least developed countries are also those which are least urbanized.
On the contrary, Europe, whose urbanization process is several centuries old, is urbanized to an impressive degree.
So, this urbanization has not played itself out uniformly across the planet.
We have selected some images, all African, to show how we have extremely different contexts if we are in the North or South of the Sahara, if we are in the Sahel or the tropics, in Southern Africa or in Equatorial Africa.
So, when we talk of the process of urbanization, we have the impression of a sort of groundswell which is the same everywhere, so we must take into account the fact that we have extremely different contexts.
So, any gathering of data, by region, by continent, reveals realities which are extremely differentiated within each country, even within each of the regions within the different countries.
We can see, if we look again at the chart in a slightly different way, the percentages of urban populations in 2011.
We can see that we have, in North America, in Europe and in Latin America, very high levels, since here, in North America, we are at slightly more than 80%.
If we look at the four largest continents: 
Oceania, North America,
Latin America and Europe, we are, in all cases, at over 70%.
Looking at the whole world, the limit is a bit over 50%.
And then, in Asia and Africa, we see that, even if Asia slightly surpasses Africa, one is, roughly speaking, at less than 50%, closer to 40% for Africa, and globally 45% for Asia.
Let's look now at a few numbers specific to Africa, from 2010.
Using the classical division of Africa into
East, Central, North, South and West, we have a population of slightly more than a billion.
And of that billion, 413 million, or 40%, are urban.
We can also see that between a very slightly urbanized East Africa, and an extremely urbanized South, there are enormous regional disparities.
Finally, we find North Africa nearing the world's average.
Still, the rate of urbanization as it relates to global rates.
So here we are at this column, here.
We have seen it surpass 50%, to 52%, and then in the future--these are, of course, projections--by 2050 it should be around 70%. So, it continues with a curve like this, and the rate of urbanization should not weaken but instead continue.
In Africa, we are at about 40%, here.
We begin very, very low, and then we must catch up slowly.
In other words the differential, in 2050, will be clearly less significant than in 1950. So, in one century the gap between the world average and the African average has been reduced.
This means that there will be an accelerated process of urbanization in Africa.
The rates of urbanization, once again by region, in function of years.
If we look at the 1970's, we can see besides Southern Africa, already rather strongly urbanized, based on it having a higher percentage, in 1970, than the combined percentages of all of the rest of Africa in 2010.
The others, East Africa, for example, which has a very, very weak proportion, roughly averaging at around 20-plus percent in 1970.
In 2000, things are very different.
This is the current situation, with Africa at 40% and with relatively proportional growth, more or less, across all regions.
The projections for 2050, this time at 61.6%--this based on the data of 2009 projected against 2050, but one can see that it will be close-- besides East Africa which will not have caught up, but will be around 60-70% of the territorial group.
The annual growth rate is extremely important.
We can see this rate at 6% in 1965, 1970, in East and Central Africa, and these rates will shoot up rather spectacularly.
If we look at the whole of Africa, we begin with a rate of 
4.65, which falls as low as 2.15. This number is where we end up.
This is to say that the growth rate is increasingly weakened and will weaken further.
By comparison, today we find ourselves, at roughly 3.31, which is an extremely elevated rate in relation to those one might find in Europe, where the rate is well below 1%.
Another phenomenon, when it comes to the size of cities, is that urbanization is not the same everywhere.
Look at the numbers from 2010 for Sub-Saharan Africa.
Finally, for the whole of Africa we see more or less the same proportions, were it not for the fact that instead of two agglomerations,
Lagos and Kinshasa, with more than 10 million inhabitants,
3 million for the whole of Africa, there is Cairo, which has come into play.
What is interesting to see, is not the different absolute numbers, this holds little interest for us, but it is the percentages of urban population.
Which is to say that, today, in Africa,
57% of the population
---at least in 2010---
57% of the urban African population lives in cities of fewer than 500,000 inhabitants, which we call intermediate cities.
Another very important number, this 26%, which is to say that 
26% of the urban African population lives in cities of 1-5 million inhabitants.
So, we can see very clearly that between the two we have the whole, the very, very large majority of urbanites, and that the others are very residual numbers, because one has 17% in other types of cities.
Therefore our task, as planners, should be focused on, above everything else these intermediate cities of fewer than 500,000 inhabitants, so numerous that we have no data here, which is very important, and the cities, which are often capitals, of between 1 and 5 million inhabitants.
It is within these two categories of cities where the majority of urbanites reside.
Of course, in a very media-centered way, the focus is on the group of cities of more than 10 million inhabitants.
We hear often of Kinshasa or Lagos, and also of Cairo, but in terms of percentage of the urban African population which actually resides there, this is relatively low.
So to effect change, it must be focused on those cities of
1-5 million inhabitants, and those of fewer than 500,000.
The urban population of 
Sub-Saharan Africa by city size.
It is the same schematic we just spoke of, except we are using a temporal perspective, between 1990 and 2025. We realize that in intermediate cities, those with fewer than 
500,000 inhabitants, their proportion, or let's say their relative importance will clearly diminish, from 57% to 43%,
So this is where they become less important.
At the same time we find cities with more than 10 million inhabitants where, still, there is great ambiguity because all it takes is to add one city, and because we go from two to three, the proportions increase, and the numbers grow larger.
We can also see that in cities of 5-10 million, all it takes is one city moving up a category and then we lose one.
This likewise diminishes the number of inhabitants from the next category.
So we can roughly say that it does not move much.
It will continue. Let's take for example the cities of
5-10 million or more, who will continue to increase in size, little by little, gently, but with certainty.
So we have this curve. 
And then we realize that, in the end it is within these cites of 1-5 million inhabitants where the gap between 1990 and 2025 will gradually increase.
It is within this category of cities, those with 1-5 million inhabitants where we will see the greatest development of urbanization.
Another important element, which we will look at in a moment is how one looks, on a macro level, at numbers, at the great trends of urbanization, without once mentioning the living conditions in new and future urban centers.
To offer an example, in 1900-- no, excuse me, in 2000, the UN-Habitat gave the figure that 32% of the world's population lives in slums, within developing countries 43%, and in the category of less-developed countries,
78% of inhabitants live in slums.
Therefore we have, at the same time, numbers which characterize world urbanization, yet these numbers have a very different meaning if one is in the South or the North.
And, as one can easily see and we'll discuss later, one of the biggest problems of this urbanization is the increase in slums and of the population who live in shacks.
Very good, this is the end of this first part.
I'll see you in the next video.
