The high growth rates that we see in the southern countries are generally accompanied by a strong migration of the inhabitants living in rural areas toward urban ones.
A correlation exists between poverty and the proportion of rural populations, and the speed of urbanization.
The longer I am in a poor country, the more rural the country is, the higher the urbanization rate.
This rapid urbanization in the South, that we find mainly in the South, as we said, is going to create a certain number of problems that we can list, and in particular, the environmental degradation, widespread informality, an extremely strong spatial segregation that leads to a fragmentation of the territories, public politics that we could qualify as ineffective, a lack of correlation at once between city-dwellers' needs and infrastructures, and a weakly redistributive economy, which is to say that it is an economy that cannot reach all the population strata.
We can view this urbanization in a negative way, which is what we just did by listing like that all its main problems, but we can also, today, the benefits of urbanization, the potential that can be found behind this rapid urbanization.
One of the first aspects, is the question of population concentration.
Which is to say that it opens a range of possibilities, provides opportunities to find a job, to do business.
The more people, the more shoppers, the wider the catchment area, the more commercial possibilities.
Which doesn't mean that it is always possible, but we increase the chances of being to do business.
Another thing we see in these questions of rapid and accelerated urbanization, is that public powers don't always follow, and new forms of democracies develop, here and there, participatory democracies that can lead to participatory budgets.
Another important potential of urbanization, is that, even if the people's needs are much greater than the infrastructures at their disposal in the city, in relation to those in rural areas, these proportions are extremely important.
That means that, even if it is lacking infrastructures, these are eminently greater than those in rural areas which gives a definite advantage, an incredible potential of city versus country.
We can then imagine, as well, that some forms of decentralization, which accompany these urbanization processes, may eventually offer some significant results.
So, for now, it is wishful thinking that the decentralization would effectively be put in place in all countries, giving public authorities managerial autonomy.
And even if we have this, from a legal standpoint, these communities have the responsibilities but not the means to implement such reponsibilities.
So there are, for now, very few cities, very few countries, that have really implemented the decentralization process.
The last important potential point of urbanization is the question of informality.
We have seen it just now as a negative but informality can also be seen as an extremely positive given, because at the end of the day, it is a type of redistribution of an economy, a way to manage a territory, a city, which are extremely different within a formal framework, but which hold within them, equally, a potential that is extremely important and extremely interesting.
And without a doubt, we should move much further in the analysis of informality to see how it is distilled almost everywhere, that it is not only the prerogative of the poorest, but that we also find them in every population strata.
Our recent studies even showed exactly the contrary, which is, finally, that informality is confined to the richest, who can do without laws, while the poorest, still demand their right to a legal framework and the security that this legal framework can provide.
Here we have, in a few words, outlined the questions of urbanization in the world, the questions of urbanization in Africa, with some points.
We must take away from this one important thing, which is that we have contexts that are extremely different, both between continents, and even within the African continent; between East Africa and North Africa we have trends in urbanization that are not at all the same, and even within these different regions, geographical subregions in Africa, we have countries that are not similar, and within these countries we have extremely urban regions, and extremely rural regions.
So, we have to be wary of big numbers, which offer indications, but we must then reach down to the level of the city, to the level of the region, to truly understand and identify the mechanisms underlying this urbanization.
