Welcome back to Nature, In Code.
We're in chapter 6, Lecture 3.
We just finished a previous lecture with a bit of a quantatative framework for understanding how genotypes change over time given natural selection due to the differences in fitness.
Now we're going to take this one step further and we're going to take a look at this affects the allele frequencies which is ultimately what we're interested in.
So again we're going to do things here in very simple mathematical terms.
So we started with this A1A1,A1A2, and A2A2 framework and we said alright after 1 natural step of natural selection the fitnesses here would be P^2 W11 divided by this normalizing factor and here would be 2pq times W12 divided by this normalizing factor and here would be q^2 W22 divided by this normalizing factor.
And so we can now very easily ask ourselves okay what is the
allele frequency now? so the allele frequency in the next generation.
Well it's simply this entire frequency here, because all of these genotypes will fully contribute to the A1 allele
So it's p^2 W11 over W bar and half of this term because half of the alleles in A1A2 genotypes are obviously of type  A1.
So it's this term 2pq W12 divided by W bar but then we have to divide this again by a factor of 2.
And now of course we can simplify this a little bit and say okay
2 divided by 2, we can get rid of that.
Now we have the same denominator so this can be simplified as p^2 W11 plus pq times W12 divided by W bar.
And now if we ask ourselves, what is the change in allele frequencies?
Then it would simply be what we have in the next generation minus what we have before. Alright?
So this is very easy, so it's this term minus p.
Now if we try to simplify this, we can simplify it a little bit but we end up with an equation that's not a very simple equation.
But I'm going to show it to you nonetheless because it is a central equation.
So what it is is, it is pq times p times W11 minus W12 plus q times W11 minus W22
So this whole term here 
I multiply it by pq, and then divide it W bar which is p^2 W11 plus 2pq W12 plus q^2 W22, and again I'm really putting it here simplified in quotes because this is obviously anything but a simple equation but nevertheless it's a central equation in evolutionary biology.
Why?
Well, first of all it calculates the change in allele frequencies which is our working definition of evolution.
And it does so in response to natural selection using these fitness terms and we know that natural selection's  the queen of the forces acting on this delta p.
And so this is really a central to evolutionary biology as one can imagine.
But so now we look at this bit of a beast of an equation and we ask ourselves okay so what's the point here?
We want to understand whether 
Wp goes up or down and by how much but is it very surprising, we have an allele that has a higher fitness
Okay if it's A1 we expect Wp to be positive because we expect the A1 frequency to go up.
Conversely, if A1 has a lower fitness than A2 we expect p to go down.
I mean is it really that simple
Is that all there is? And this question kind of has two answers depending on how you look at it.
And the answers are yes and no.
So, if you look at this from a purely allele perspective alone then yes it is that simple.
Allele has higher fitness, fine it's probably going to increase the lower fitness is going to decrease
But if you look at it from the perspective of genotypes it's actually not that simple and we need to in fact to look at this problem from the perspective of the genotype because ultimatly it's genotypes that have a fitness it's genotypes that can build individuals if you will that then survive and reproduce.
It's the genotypes that make it from generation to generation packaged of course likely differently.
And so it is ultimatley the alleles that have a fitness but we can't think of the alleles alone as having a fitness because they usually come packaged as genotypes.
And if we do this we get really interesting dynamics and I want to show you now how we can develop this framework.
It's really fascinating. 
We can simplify this whole framework we have A1A1,A1A2, and A2A2.
And our idea is that we're going to assign fitnesses to these genotypes.
So before when we did this fitness we simply called this
W11, W12, and W22.
Now we're going to make
 two simplifying assumptions
We're going to say, first of all you know what?
We're going to set this to 1.
Why, well because we can and it makes things simpler.
As I said many times the absolute values here don't matter, what matters are the relative values.
So it's completly fine if you set one of them to 1.
And then the other assumption that I'm going to make is,
I'm going to say the other homozygote has a lower value a lower fitness value. Namely 1-s.
So why this genotype and not this genotype?
Well it really doesn't matter, you can swap the 1's and the 2's here and you'll have the exact same situation.
You just have one of the homozygotes as a fitness
1 and the other as 1-s.
Okay a lower fitness.
By the way this s now we call this the selection coefficient.
Okay the selection coefficient.
Good, so now what about the heterozygote?
Well here we're going to say that this one has a fitness of 1-s but I'm going to modify this term here by multiplying it with age first. 
So 1-age s.
And we call this h the heterozygous effect.
So hetorozygous effect.
Why? Well because it only affects the heterozygotes, A1A2.
Okay now  if we would do the math we would simplfy this equation a little bit of delta p and we would get pqs times ph plus q times 1 minus h.
Okay
Divided by 1 minus 2pqhs minus 2qs.
Now again I'm not pretending that this is a much simpler formula but it's certainly simpler than the one before.
And this is as simple as we can get because before we had these three values in the equation
W11,W12, and W22 and now we're only working with only two values namely s and h so it's simplified a bit.
But still this is sort of now the queen  of equations in evolutionary biology.
And I know it's not the most beautiful equation but it's a very powerful equation.
And I want you to take note of this equation because we are now going to implement this equation in Javascript in a few minutes.
Before we do that there's one more thing.
If you look at this framework that we're going to use there are actually a number of different cases that we can look at depending on this value of age. 
If you have a given s you can now, depending on the value of age get very different what I would call fitness landscapes.
What do I mean by this? 
Well let's take a look.
So we have here the fitness, the W and here we have the three different genotypes
A1A1, A1A2, and A2A2.
Okay, and we said lets say this is 1 here.
We said A1A1 has a fitness of  1.
And we also said A2A2 has a lower fitness.
Okay so lower by how much? Well.
If we would draw the imaginary line here this is 1.
So it's this difference here.
This is s selection coefficient so the value here would be 1-s.
So now how are we going to choose the value of age?
So we can do this in three different ways.
The first way we can do this is we can assume that h is larger than 1.
So what does that mean exactly?
Well, remember that A1A2 so that the fitness right, just as a reminder the fitness of A1A2 is 1-hs.
Okay so where is that point going to lie?
Well we have 1-s here but if age is larger than 1 then this term here is actually going to be even larger than s alone right?
Because it's multiplied with a value that's larger than 1.
So 1 minus this term is down here somewhere.
Yeah it's lower than this value because we multiply s by age which is larger than 1.
And so if you now look at this this is kind of a value right?
So it turns out now in this scenario when his is larger than 1 that the heterozygote is actually the genotype withe the lowest frequency of all three.
The other alternative that we can think  of  is that h is smaller than zero. 
It is in fact negative.
Well what does that mean?
Well let's take a look again at this formula if h is a negative term then this term her is going to be negative.
1 minus something negative is going to be 1 plus something.
So in fact the value here will be larger than 1.
Okay, so it's going to be here somewhere.
And this is also interesting because it's the exact opposite.
So this now is kind of a peak, again if you will.
And now, the heterozygote fitness is in fact, the highest of all 3.
And then we can have the cases in between where we can say okay h is certainly larger than zero.
Okay it is a positive value but it is smaller than 1.
So it is neither of these extremes but is somewhere in between.
And what that means is that at the maximum d values would be here if h were exactly zero.
And the minimum would be here if age were exactly 1.
Right, because this would correspond to this value.
But it could be really any value here in between.
But no matter which value you would pick this would be neither a valley nor a peak. It would be a slope.
And so that's why I use the term fitness landscape.
Because it has these elements of landscapes, slopes of valleys and of  peaks.
And it turns out that these three situations describe three very different types of natural selection with very different outcomes.
So the green one in fact where age is in this intermediary value where you have the slope. This is called Directional Selection.
Directional Selection.
The case where you have the peak, so where age is in fact negative, and your heterozygote has the highest fitness this is called Balancing Selection.
Balancing Selection.
And last but certainly not least
In the case where age is not only positive but larger than 1 and you get these fitness valleys this is a situation that is called Disruptive Selection.
So at the moment you kind of have to take this at face value
I'm telling you that these are three different types of selections.
You can certainly see that here but I'm also suggesting that these have very different outcomes in terms of evolution.
Okay, now enough claims let's put these ideas into JavaScript.
And let's see what happens,
I'll see you in the next lecture.
