Hello and welcome to this lesson which introduces the concept of spatial auto-correlation.
We will mainly talk about spatial dependance, so determine to what extent the value taken by the attribute of an object depends on its geographical position or not
This can be the case of the measured temperature on the surface of the leaves of a plant for example.
The objectives of this lesson are to explain the concept of spatial dependence and to present the paradox linked to the use of the tools of the classical statistic in a geographical context.
The information presented here will allow you to assimilate the concept of spatial dependance, which is a fundamental concept for the measurement of spatial auto-correlation and to recognize the bias induced by the use of classical statistics in this context.
It is a quantitative geographer, a Swiss-American, named Waldo Tobler who best described this concept by enunciating what is called the first law of geography in an article written in 1970.
According to this law, everything interacts with everything in the geographical space, but two close objects are more likely to do so than two distant objects.
To illustrate this notion of spatial dependence, here is a first example related to football. we will focus our attention on brazilian and croatian supporters during the opening match of the 2014 world cup between Brazil and Croatia.
In this image, an individual dressed in yellow has more chance to interact with another person wearing the same color.
And in the same way a person in red and white has a better chance of interacting with another person in red and white.
The membership of a same group determined the spatial distribution of these people and the spatial dependence induced by this membership is perceptible in the geographical space thanks to the color of the t-shirts.
Another example, here in Dakar, around the international airport, which we see in the image.
The commercial and logistical activities linked to the activity of the airport are grouped around it, whereas other activities, such as the residential area, for example, which we see in the foreground, are gathered elsewhere on the territory.
Around the airport, the buildings are similar, there are large warehouses or hangars.
And this is also the case in the residential area.
The houses have a similar appearance and size.
The spatial proximity favours the interaction between objects of the same category and the nature of the activity is betrayed by a similar appearance.
The spatial dependence highlighted by the two examples which we have just seen can be measured with simple tools that you will learn to manipulate.
The functioning of these tools is based on the comparison between an observed spatial distribution and a random spatial distribution.
On this regular grid of 10 × 10 cells, we have represented the spatial distribution of a phenomenon.
There is a particular arrangement of the displayed values, which indicates a certain spatial dependence.
On the right, we have illustrated the random spatial distribution of the same values but in several configurations.
On the left, the geographical space is not neutral.
In some ways, it fixes certain values in specific places.
On the right, it is neutral.
Any location in space can take all possible values.
On this base, the measurement tools that we will use allow firstly to quantify the spatial regularity of a phenomenon then to determine the radius of action of the spatial dependence and finally to differentiate an observed spatial distribution from a random spatial distribution.
Let's consider real data now.
This map shows 765 neolithic sites, they have been dated and their age is between 6,000 and
8,000 years before the present.
The darker the green of the point, the older the neolithic site.
We notice that the oldest sites are concentrated in the fertile crescent region and moving gradually towards the North-West, we find sites that are younger.
This is an example of spatial dependence that illustrates human migration towards the North after the end of the last major ice age.
We will reuse this example a little later.
From the moment we want to quantify this spatial dependence, we are confronted with a paradox.
Indeed, according to Tobler and the first law of geography, everything interacts with everything but close objects are more likely to do so than distant objects.
So natural phenomena, such as air temperature, or socio-demographic phenomena, such as the population density, are not randomly distributed in the geographical space.
But to measure the spatial structure of these phenomena, we have to use tools of classical statistics.
And these tools require on one hand the independence between the samples and on the other hand a random distribution of the latter, there is therefore a contradiction.
This contradiction is due to the fact that the tools of the classical statistics are not intended to be applied in a geospatial context.
Their use is based on the assumption that geographical space is neutral
This geographical area constitutes the simple support, without friction, on which the studied phenomena take place.
Theoretically, in this context, the location of observations in space must not influence their attributes.
However, since there are often no alternative tools, we should use them with the awareness of the biases induced by their use with geographic data and adapt the datasets to meet the statistical prerequisites.
A good example is the linear regression.
Theoretically, it must be calculated with observations selected according to a random procedure.
Indeed, if the observations are spatially dependent, the estimated values will be biased for the entire study area, because exceptional values, located in geographical subregions, will influence the predicted values on all the analyzed territory.
Or furthermore, a strong correlation between two sample attributes located in a same small subregion will influence the measurement on all the studied area.
We will now see a practical example to illustrate this type of bias.
Let's take again the example of the 765 neolithic sites.
In the GeoDa software, we created three views.
At the top, on the left, we have the histogram of the age class distribution of the sites.
At the bottom, on the left, the spatial distribution of the 765 sites.
And on the right, a graph that illustrates the relation between the age of the sites on the Y axis and a genetic diversity variable on the X axis that characterizes goat populations sampled around the sites at the beginning of the 21st century.
This relationship is of interest because it confirms the hypothesis that the neolithic populations of the fertile crescent began to migrate towards the North-West from the end of the last great ice age.
The lower the age of the sites, the lower the genetic diversity, since the animal populations have progressively fragmented and the reproduction has subsequently taken place between related individuals.
The regression line shows that the older the age of the sites, the higher the genetic diversity, but this relation is strongly influenced by a group of sites concentrated in the Middle East.
Indeed, if this group of sites is removed from the calculation, the slope of the regression decreases noticeably.
The values predicted by the model across Europe are largely influenced by about forty points, all located in the same subregion.
Now you know what spatial dependence is.
Near objects are more likely to interact with each other than to do so with distant objects.
Some attributes can be influenced by characteristics of the environment and therefore the geographic space is not neutral.
This highlights a paradox since the statistical tools we use most often require this space to be neutral.
It is therefore on a random drawing of the objects that constitute the georeferenced datasets, that must carry the calculations.
We will see in the next lesson how to implement a spatial auto-correlation measure and then how to determine its significance.
