Working on the command line is not always practical.
Often we make typos.
We want to change settings, highlight.
It's not very convenient, having to retype everything.
Search all commands, as we did by using the arrows.
It is essential to work with scripts.
That is to say files that contain commands to run and can be edited
This is what allows us to repeat the calculations or redo the work thereafter.
Our programs contain algorithms.
What is an algorithm?
Wiki explains that an algorithm is a finite sequence, unambiguous operations or instructions to resolve a problem and get an outcome.
In particular, we want to give parameters to the algorithm called input parameter included.
And we want to receive a response called output or out.
For example, when we want to calculate the volume of a sphere, one must first ask the radius of the sphere and that's the user will give.
Then a mathematical formula volume is calculated.
And the result is delivered to the user.
In this example, input is the radius, the algorithm is the calculating the volume and out, is the volume.
So how to create your own script?
So let's start by cleaning our environment and we created a directory where we will put our files.
Here, for example, let's say I call
C directory, octave introduction. mkdir, it means.
Create a directory.
One can also create otherwise.
After, you can go in this directory.
So cd, octave introduction, and you return to your repertoire.
Besides, as we see here q we're in another another reporter.
The same can be done using the buttons that are there.
Now I want to create a file that contains the steps needed to calculate the volume of a sphere.
So I'll do everything.
Edit ... And I have to, so not only the filename, but also the extension.
And the extension is usually point m.
Let's see, the file does not exist, it asks us to create it.
Now, there is only a small feature of octave, it is the use of these symbols sharp
(#) to comment.
There is also another way is to put percentages.
And the other way is compatible with
Matlab and octave.
So suddenly, it will not use sharps.
And instead, we will use percentages.
And also, the automatic copyright is removed just write on the new file. It is not necessary each time to copyright. It's good when we make major programs.
And here there is also a help section which is typical to octave.
We will also delete it directly.
You just end up with this part.
Now we are doing a function.
We're doing a script.
So again, you can delete that part.
It will be useful later when we see the functions. it was displayed. If you are using octave, it must first erase all this part when you have a file again, with Matlab, the file will be empty directly.
Now I can save.
And start writing my program.
So I set the radius.
Take for example, 5.4.
I put a semicolon because I don't want to see the result of this operation each time.
And then I can calculate the volume of a sphere is given by four-thirds times y.
Pi is the variable three point fourteen, fifteen and so on.
The number of Pythagoras.
Times the radius cubed.
And there, I do not put a semicolon like this, when I run my script, I will also have the answer displayed on the screen.
Now I backup.
I return to the command window.
And I type the name of my script.
(Fear) volume, in fact, do not put point.
So it's just, it calls the script, the file without the extension.
It will execute. Now the program is executed.
So here we have a mistake.
By seeking the error, the error, it is the line
2, the 21st column. Line 2, here, radius, it is not known.
Here, I define the radius with a capital letter.
Here, lowercase. So be consistent and use always lowercase, uppercase in a consistent way.
So now I can restart my script.
And I get the result.
The volume of this sphere is 659.58.
Approximately. When I write a program as a simple script, you must also document.
This is comment on what we are doing.
When I look at my file, I have not added any comments.
There 's no comments.
And besides if I ask for help regarding this file, of this script, I get no response.
This file is not documented.
So how do you document it?
You must write comments.
So in comments, it always starts with a percentage with Octave and Matlab like that, it was a comment.
So this is something that is written in the file, but that is not executed. So what makes this script?
I can usually write in English.
Because we do not know who will read our script in octave if it says otherwise. indistinct conversation.
It saves.
Now I look at the help.
And it shows us, the sentence that said it.
Plus the fact that it is a script.
And then, in theory, there would be other aid that could be obtained if we have a wider documentation.
But in this case, only seven aid.
Next, in the same file, you must add other comments.
Not only help but also what we do at each stage?
So first, we will give the radius.
And further, the volume is calculated.
When running this volume, well, there is the same result as before.
The comments did not appear.
Often we want to be able to change some data during execution.
For example, we want to ask the department to the user rather that write directly to a file.
So one thing you can use is the input function.
So how does it work?
An example, I want to get a number, so I request input.
And I also give a little explanation of what I want to achieve, then I say entry number.
At that time, I go in number,
I put 8 to 7.
Then I'll copy and paste that part in my script.
And instead of having the radius equal to 5.4, I say enter radius of the sphere. I save, Control S
And I run my script.
So my script, now  asks me radius.
So I put a sphere of radius 1.
And it calculates four thirds times Pi cube.
I can remember it again.
Give another number, I no longer need to touch my file or script. The output of the algorithm may be displayed on the command line.
Or simply well be saved in a variable.
If we just want to save the value in a variable, can be like that. We save.
Is executed. I added the semicolon.
We'll see what it does to our script.
If volume. The Ray.
And nothing happens.
So, is that the variable volume has been changed?
Apparently yes. I try again, I'll do a role customer.
All my environment.
And I remember again the script.
And I put 5. 1. And I'll see if the volume is really the one.
One can simply save the variables that are in the script.
And display nothing.
There are not any problems.
What is important to know is a script, it uses all the variables that are in the command window, also across the variables that you set in a script, they go after using the script, appear also in the command line.
For example, if I make a comment, calculating the radius here radius, there because before,
I calculated.
I call volume sphere.
There was no error.
The radius used is the one before.
So now, I reroll, I call volume sphere,
I will some mistake. Radius is not set.
So's try again, I say equal radius 4.3.
I call my function.
And the volume was calculated.
So that, to show you all that is used in the script, it is saved directly into your environment.
I come back, I prefer to use the radius like that.
And besides sometimes, you want to clear all early to say whether we really sure we need not all that is in my work environment.
It is important to use all clear here, but it is perhaps wise to think about it before, if it does not clear all the bugs.
So that, on the one hand for the variables that exist.
But now I would still like to see something on the screen.
I worked on the radius, on the volume.
Now I would like the volume S to appear.
So to do it, I can use the 10.
It takes a string.
We have not seen what it is, it's characters in a row.
They are delimited by quotation marks, a single quote.
But here I can say volume of the sphere.
So now it's a bit long, I go to the line.
So on the cut.
While there, I have to put the radius.
I put simply radius like that, he does not know how to interact.
I'll change it.
I do a number to string, it converts the number to a of string characters, I select the character.
And now I would like to display the volume of sphere, values.
Three, for example, and then it must also transform it to swing, to a string, the result.
If I can put the semicolon, then, tha there is within these brackets, I have no chain characters I have 3 strings, just next to the other.
So I have to put them together.
It was said that putting together such vectors it would be with square brackets.
And now, what is done.
I put a space just to see them better.
And now I'll run my script.
I'll put the volume of sphere radius (phon), 4.2 (phon).
And that is what was asked.
To write complex operations, it is necessary to use files. These files, we will write all commands like this.
One can also modify and save them to continue our work.
This is called a script.
Later, we will see that we can also write functions.
It's a little different.
But the principle is the same. it's written sr of files the commands you want to run.
So we saw the use of scripts.
And also how to organize work in relation to the entry of the algorithm, to the inputs of the algorithm, the algorithm execution.
But here, it was just a line with calculations and outputs which may be either in the form of a variable data value saved in our environment, or a display for the user.
