To better understand and explain, it is necessary to draw a graph of a function or data.
Often there are several sets of data to be compared, you must then use different colors or symbols.
At the end, we must save the graph to an image file, a PDF, PNG or JPEG to include it in a presentation or web page.
There are several kinds of charts: two-dimensional, three-dimensional, lines or surfaces.
We're use to a specific mathematical language for graphics.
It is also the case for Octave or Mat Lab language it must be learned in order to then understand the mechanisms.
First, what is that figure?
A figure, is a window on our screen.
One can have a window, 2 windows, etc.
Each figure is named 1, 2, 3, etc.
In a figure, there may be one or more graphical objects called plots.
A plot generally has axes which define the units and the interval we want to show.
In a plot, we can draw one or more graphic, that is,points described by their coordinates.
A chart is also characterized by the style with which one draws: color, symbol we put at each point and how the points are settled.
Let's first see how to make a 2D drawing.
As I already explained, I prefer to use scripts to be able to coordinate my work.
So first, I open my script that
I call loughning 2D point m.
It does not exist.
There is something that will open and
I will explain that this part is something specific to a function in Octave, we're not interested in it.
So we'll delete it  and we will keep it this way so we have an empty file.
I have to say what I want in this graph.
I say 1 to say "I want to open a window
"And this window Figure 1.
And inside, I can draw something, but when I want to draw something,
I must first define the points and the coordinates I want to put in my chart.
For example, I take the vector X which is a set of points and is distributed between negative Pi and Pi and I want 21 points, not much.
You can always increase our script earlier.
Then I will take as Y equals the sine of this vector.
So of course it should be interpreted as the sine of each point within X, so it is element by element.
Now that I have X and Y, I can plot.
I put first X, then Y then I can start drawing.
I save and I execute.
I see my chart and sine drawn.
I come back to my script and
I will improve.
The first modification I want to do is change the color.
I take magenta.
I can connect the dots with 2 points.
And then each coordinate X and Y, draw a small circle.
I save and I execute.
Now I have my graphic in magenta with connected points by small strokes and at every point, a small circle.
When I do X and Y, the first elements of X and Y are drawn, here the second, third, etc.
I still want to improve my plot.
For example, I will also add the cosine on the same drawing.
I still put the X.
I don't the values ​​of the cosine, but I can calculate them right away, I don't need to save them in advance, so I have X, cos X and now
I can draw it in black, so with K.
Then I want a dash and I want an X at each location.
I save and I execute.
There, I see that the cosine is black with crosses.
After, I can decide to do the drawing in blue.
Backup.
Execute
What I might want to put?
Now I would like to add a title to my chart.
The title is sin and cos.
Then I can put them with a legend.
What is a legend?
I want to know the blue corresponds to such a function and black with such a function.
So the first function I drew was the sine.
I put sine X in quotation marks, it must be a string character, then the second is cos X.
Will I put something else?
For example, the axes.
I can name the axes.
To label the axes, we say X lab to name the X axis
Then of course for the Y axis, we'll take lab Y.
I save, I run and I see the axes X and
Y are marked, the title is here.
Now maybe a little comment in relation to what is written here.
I had to increase the font size to show in a nice way in your video, it means that here we can not read.
On your screen, it should not appear that bad.
What's left to do?
Perhaps to save the figure in a PDF file or or may be JPEG, etc.
We use the command,
What does this command require?
It needs to first know what you want to save.
So we want to take the figure 1 or rather the figure
I'm looking at, this one is called GCA,
Get Current Access.
It takes the figure here now, then we say the name, this is my plot.
PDF where I saved it, then we need to say the format.
I say the PDF.
Then, I can run my script.
This script will not only draw a pretty figure on the screen, but also save a PDF file, ready for use.
You can also see other backup formats using the command Help save S.
Or also if you want to change the color or the small symbol which is placed at each point, you can keep control Help plot or also the command Doc plot or
Doc save S.
