We can also make 3D graphics.
For a 3D graphic, it will create a new script I already cleaned.
It is empty, there is nothing.
I want to use a new figure, say figure 2.
In this figure, I want to make a three-dimensional drawing.
For example, a parametric curve.
The parameter, will be T and I'll fill it with a stop.
Therefore Inspace equals the Inspace less than 2 Pi up to 2
Pi and I take 200 points.
For example, I want to make a propeller.
What is a propeller?
A propeller is a parametric curve where we can draw or browse the propeller with this parameter.
Then plot 3, a 3D plot.
The first coordinate is T is my parameter.
Then, the sine of T, the cosine of T and at the end, I can give color, or features to my curve.
I'll draw it in blue with lines.
I save and I execute.
I have my propeller. Again, I need to put a title.
We will put a propeller and label the axes X, Y and Z because now we have 3 axes.
I'll put X, then I copy and paste to put Y and Z axes
I save, I run and here is my pretty graphic.
What do these 3 data represent,
T, sin t and cos t?
These are the 3 coordinates.
Now if I want to put up the propeller,
I have to put parameter T at the end.
I save, the run.
Now if you want to add a second propeller there is the option to put a comma and after write the next for the second curve, or copy and paste the first command, change the direction, so a propeller that rotates in the other direction.
I'll make a black propeller.
I will turn and this is my new propeller again in red.
I don't know why.
I can turn it, but the first is gone.
So how do we make it reappear or rather not disappear?
You have to give the command hold on.
This command also works for 2D figures.
So now the two are present.
This is only possible with the version of Octave that I am using, the colors are not well distributed.
Probably with your version,newer than mine or with Mat Lab, these color problems do not appear.
Again, I can save my figure.
So it is the current figure, I call it
3D plot.
JPEG and I want it in this format.
And I can save and run this script.
So now instead of a curve, I want to make a surface, I use the command surface.
So I make a new script that I call surface plot M
As we said, I have already prepared an empty file.
I take figure 2 that I have available, if it not clean as mine, use the command
CFL.
With CLF, the current figure is cleaned, so it's empty like mine.
When I do a surface, I actually need
2 parameters.
We will make a curve with two parameters and now these 2 parameters represent the axes X and Y.
While the height of my surface, will be the third coordinate.
In the first coordinate in the X axis,
I have to set my points.
So for example under 1 to 1 and I take
In Y, I will also take under 1 to 1, but this time
I take 200 so that if you ever make a small mistake of order or others, we immediately see that you have a size mistake.
It is also to check that you do not do handling errors.
With these points of delivery,
I have to build a grid.
A grid that represents all the points
I want to draw on my surface.
To generat it, I use the command meshgrid.
I want to have X and Y in capital letters, it will be
2 matrices of the same size.
And I use the meshgrid command
Meshgrid X and Y. So I take the vectors
X and Y and I building a grid map of X and Y.
Once I have these two matrices,
I can calculate the value of a function that I want to draw on this surface from the coordinates X and Y and
So for each point, each entry of these two matrices, I will evaluate the function for example, sine 2 times Pi times
X, uppercase because I'll take the value element by element of the sine function.
I'll do element by element operations so I have to star point to multiply element by element.
And then cosine Pi times Y.
Now, I evaluated my function, it is a function that has 2 inputs and one output, so it's a kind of F of
X and Y, and I will draw the graph of FXY.
Now I can use the surf command that will create the surface with these data.
I can directly give a title.
It is a surface. I save and I execute.
Now, you see a pretty surface that I can turn using the mouse.
And besides we also see the fabric of X and Y, you see small features is the grid
I defined with the command (meshgrid).
What we have seen is only a small introduction to graphics.
There are different ways to draw functions, surfaces, etc.
The more the data is richer, the more careful you should be on the various aspects of graph reproduction
It is not the goal here, but it's important to know at least certain available tools.
