Hello, welcome to this lesson dedicated to digital elevation models.
Digital elevation models are used as the name indicates for the modeling of altimetry for topography, for construction work for development work where we use digital models for establishing calculations and projects. 
This course will consist of three parts
First of, an introduction with some notions about the relief then some notions about the representation of relief and geomorphometry and finally, the actual modeling itself with the principle of interpolation and modeling of altitudes.
In this introduction, before discussing the modeling of altitudes we return a bit to the history of cartography here with an example of a map from 1513.
The relief on this map is represented figuratively with landmarks such as hills mountains that allow for orientation in the landscape.
However, we must remember that, in these maps there is no metric.
Making a big jump in history we come to topographic maps as we know them. 
These topographic maps possess a metric. 
It relies, as we have seen, on geodetic references and it contain a lot of situational elements.
We can ask the question: on this map, how is altimetry represented? 
I give you some time to reflect on the elements that show altimetry in this map. 
We have in fact elements such as coloring, shading as well as elements for example water stream which give an indication of the relief.
We now come to the question that interests us: how to measure, how to model?
We have on this map a certain number of altimetry indicators starting with the side points, found here: 2005 meters, 1975 then, like on all topographic maps the contour lines, as we see in this figure with here the curve of 1900 meters. 
This is already a stage of modeling.
A way of giving this third dimension to our topographic map.
How to quantify altimetry, how to use the elevation?
In order to illustrate this problem
I take here an example with the rockslide of Randa with a situation here before the rockslide, in 1982 and the current status here in 2011. 
We see already on the two maps the difference in the contour here at 1900 meters, here at 1500 meters. 
I have the same curves in the current map. 
We already see that this landform has changed. 
If we want to go more into detail we can establish a profile here take this same profile on the current map draw, compare but it's long and tedious. 
For this we will establish what is called the digital elevation models.
We will use a computer model of altitudes to make a series of calculations.
In summary, in this lesson we will look at how to characterize landforms how to model terrain how to interpolate elevations and, finally, how to use these models to make derived products slope maps, orienteering maps and maps with contour lines. 
