Hello.
A synopsis, a few conclusions.
It's nearly the end of our course, our second-to-last video, and we'll very briefly review the material we've covered, not all of its elements, of course, since it took us these last 
12 weeks to cover them, but I would like to focus today on a few important points.
The first is that we must keep in mind that urbanization, this phenomenon that African cities are part of on such a broad scale, is a global phenomenon.
Africa is relatively behind when it comes to the processes of urbanization in other continents.
So there is enormous growth potential, and thus it is in Africa where we have the highest urbanization rates.
We must also keep in mind the various contexts.
We indeed speak of African cities, not of <i>the</i> African city, why?
Because, as we see in these few images, the realities are extremely different if we are in the Sahel if we are in southern Africa, if we are in English-speaking areas or French-speaking ones, in North Africa or the sub-Sahara.
So we have contexts and realities which are extremely different.
Meanwhile there are a certain number of commonalities, which enable us to reflect on African cities.
A few figures, always a few figures to start out.
As we see, the percentages of urban population, which in Africa is less than 40%, so there is significant room for growth, and this is why one of the challenges for the African continent over the next few years will surely be the issues of urbanization.
Perhaps one of the most important charts for an understanding of the African city, shows that 57% in 2010, here,
57% of the African population live in cities of fewer than 500,000 inhabitants.
And finally that cities of at least 5,000,000 inhabitants represent only 7% of the entire urban population of Africa.
So if we wish to study the African city, it is the middle-sized city which should be studied, and it is a city that has between one and five-million inhabitants, a city which is usually the capital of the country.
So we find there is a very large percentage of people who live in cities of between one and five-million inhabitants.
This urban phenomenon surfaces along with the huge changes which have occurred over the last few decades.
The first is that the city is no longer a closed and discrete system, but instead a sprawling one which extends beyond its borders.
The second change of this urban phenomenon is that of lifestyle, or rather consumption patterns, where there we tend to find certain types of lifestyles, particularly among the elite, on every continent, in every country or African city, we have the same lifestyles, or perhaps lifestyles which tend to be similar.
And then we have the emergence of new centralities.
Old cities fade away, certainly, to leave room for cities which are much newer and more dynamic, in economic or demographic terms.
So there is a reshuffling of the cards, on a global level but also on a continental one, with the emergence of new centralities.
We've also seen in this course that there are different forms of urbanization, five of them, which vary from shantytowns to large business areas, passing by residential enclaves, gentrified neighborhoods, and large residential suburbs.
So these are the forms of urbanization; these allow us to understand where people live.
Likewise, we have noted some of the challenges which have emerged, particularly that of an urbanization implemented without economic development.
Urbanization, in the books on the development of cities, is normally tied to economic development.
There, this is not the case.
We have urbanization which breaks away from this economic development.
A new factor is climate change, which is not unique to Africa, but affects all countries in the world, but it is this new factor which requires different planning in relation to this climate change.
An important challenge: the periphery, the pressure which will be placed on the suburbs.
Here we are in the suburbs of Accra.
And the major challenge of urbanization in Africa over the next few decades will be the existing urban periphery of cities not yet subject to urbanization.
That's where the challenge is.
The challenge lies not in the center of the city, not in the densification of existing suburbs, it is in the periphery to come.
There is an important challenge because we are speaking of surfaces which are basically a natural environment, and the main challenge is to propose a form of urbanization which takes into account at once the issue of nature with that of building.
All this is done against a backdrop of general mobility, in which people are more and more mobile, they move more and more with all that that entails, which is to say that infrastructure is needed to allow for this mobility.
We've seen four major challenges when it comes to the city of tomorrow-- the right of every person to live and move about in the city; the challenge of climate, as discussed; the decrease in mobility.
We know that mobility options are ever expanding, but we must reduce and regulate these mobilities.
And, finally, to redefine democratic forms.
When it comes to cities, decision-making and urban management will not take place without a redefinition of democratic forms.
We've just discussed the paradoxes of planning, particularly in relation to climate change, with on the one hand its mitigation which leads to compact forms, and the adaptation of changes which perhaps favors urban sprawl.
We've discussed energy issues, density, and here the annual fuel consumption in relation to density per capita.
The denser the city, the less fuel it consumes, the more fuel consumed, the least dense.
There too we debated modal shares of transport, in relation to the GDP, where we saw different models, the American, the European, and cities in development where the GDP is still relatively weak, and then the role of travel patterns also presents a challenge, to know whether to go in the direction of a model which may be targeted, with reduced energy use when it comes to travel, or if one adopts the American model, which is highly consumptive.
We reviewed the different types of planning, which range from the strategic to the programmatic, and which are based on the issues of land-use, its definition, to more territorial issues in view of the planning, which passed from this part to that part over the last few years.
But there still remains one framework, which is precisely that which we see, the framework that remains exactly the same in this table or that, with the same types of planning.
So there has been no paradigm shift, the universe won't change if we go from here to there.
On the contrary, we do basically the same things, leaning towards those things that are more strategic and more territorial.
This is one of the conclusions midway, that the paradigm shift occurred between the first urban plans which were subdivision plans, where one had spaced out the streets with the subsequent plans which were more strategic and programmatic but in which spatiality no longer had a role.
We won't review all these things now, we've already discussed them, but there are good reasons to plan, one does not plan simply for the sake of planning.
One plans because it is useful.
We've seen how cities were identical, that they had the same segregative modes, here, the example of Abidjan, the example of Dakkar.
We've seen how the poor have the same strategies in their cities, we've seen how developers are the same everywhere, as are their financial backers.
There is, therefore, a great proximity in African cities, the same people who work, with the same basic materials.
And this even though the contexts are extremely different.
We have identical problems, one of which is land tenure.
We can see in an image such as this one how difficult it is to regulate land-tenure issues.
But we also have the same environmental problems of circulation, poverty, segregation.
But there are limits to this planning.
We've seen in current plans, the costs of urbanization are not taken into account, we see this also in current plans, there is no mention of poverty, it's as if the city had no poor people.
We also see that in current plans, it's as if there existed some sort of average man, the invention of the <i>Average Joe</i>. who is an inhabitant of the city but who is unaccounted for, and thus we see the disconnect between management and planning.
So normally what one plans is what will be subsequently managed.
And if the link is not very clear, this will quickly present us with problems.
So we've advocated for a type of planning that would put lifestyle, people and their social activities, at the center of the discussion for a subsequent reworking of the plan in favor of one which begins with people, which focuses on the individual, and which comes not from the exterior, as is the case today.
Now, having said and seen all that, we have of course imagined, that we had, as always, our city, as it exists today, of course, but the city we're planning here, which means that we have a time frame, and within this city we have different systems which function, now it's hard to show, but we have a spatial system, an economic system, a system of actors, so these are the three things which should be taken into account.
We are not speaking of issues of programming and spatial planning, but there is a very important economic fact, and above all a fact of governance or of the system of actors, which is very, very important.
These cities present a certain number of challenges, as we've seen, the right to the city, as we've seen, the decrease in mobility, we'll indicate the challenges with our little green marks here, of course it's throughout the city that we find challenges, and then we have an equal number of constraints, challenges, which put pressure on us, here, major issues, of course, we know them well, the issues of durability, the issues of environment, the issues of poverty, or that of the climate.
There is a multitude of very important, very diverse issues, and these will affect our cities.
There you have it, a brief summary of our city, with the need for negotiation between elements, between different systems, different stakes, different challenges, between the questions we must pose, the choice of societies, we must negotiate these-- Why?
Because, to begin with, we must link together these different elements so that they can coexist, yet we'll quickly realize that there are a certain number of roadblocks which are impassable. that cannot be linked, and at this point we must negotiate between the two.
Will I choose to adapt to climate change, or instead to mitigate it?
This is a negotiation, these are the choices one must make.
And planning is simply a series of choices.
It's nothing other than a series of links and negotiations.
If we were to summarize it, this is how we would summarize this type of urban planning.
But we must always keep in mind that we deal with what already exists, but when we embark on any future planning, we become part of a system of actors, whether the inhabitants, the politics, the NGOs, private entities, we form part of a group of actors whom we must consider, we are part of an economic system, who will pay for the city?
We are also in a spatial system where we must make a certain number of decisions.
There you have it.
We've summarized in a few minutes our 12 weeks of class.
I won't revisit the impact these plans have, since we spoke of that in the previous video, but would like to quickly refresh your memory and show you two things of importance, the linking of domains, one no more important than the next, and negotiation, which are the social choices we will make.
We must be pragmatic when it comes to planning, basing ourselves on what exists, we only do things which can be implemented, utopias are interesting, but the urgency of planning in Africa reserves the utopia for a future agenda.
The utopia is the final objective, but we must be pragmatic today, quick, but also reflective.
We should not rush things, but reflect quickly, respond rapidly, and put in place these systems which are sustainable and which we don't need to alter every six months because we've made mistakes.
So the main objective is the sustainability of the system.
