Hi. Yeeshu Shukla works for the NGO Christian Aid.
He has several years of experience in water and sanitation, rural livelihoods, disaster risk reduction, climate adaptation and emergency response and recovery.
In this video, he will present an example of a community-based early warning system.
It's a very interesting question, the pilot that we are trying in the Terai region.
If you look at historically, Terai region is both on the Indian Nepalese side.
It's a highly backward region.
There are a number of rivers that flows through that region.
All of these rivers basically originate in Tibet, upstream Nepal, and they flow through entire Nepal and then enter the Terai region.
So this region is flat, flood-prone, and regular floods are a common thing.
Every year we have floods in these areas and these are like flash floods most of the times so people do not get enough time to basically evacuate.
And apart from the floods, some of this area, as I told you, has other complex problems as well, like it's a highly backward area.
So the lack of education, lack of health infrastructure and lack of access to reliable, trustworthy information-- which is very critical to any early warning-- is a common thing in that area.
So the objective was basically to engage people, to begin with, in their own self-analysis of risk: the hazards and their capacities.
And that's how we basically brought people on board because that's very important with any early warning initiative.
Technology is obviously one aspect of it but technology is not the only answer.
It's basically because from a sustainability point of view we have to bring people on the board right from the beginning.
The second important thing was-- major objective was-- that we wanted it to be a community to community-centered early warning system between the Indian communities and the Nepalese communities.
So suppose if the technology fails then what?
Then people to people exchange still remains.
And the third important element,
I would say, is the capacity building.
It's not only about early warning, preparedness and evacuation.
It's also about doing other things in terms of DRR.
DRR is a widespread field so early warning is only for the monsoons.
So what about the next remaining months?
So we will engage people. 
In the participatory analysis they have done the risk reduction planning and based on those plannings they have developed action plans.
And based on the action plans they have actually gone in to improve their education, health and livelihood needs.
Background preparatory activities are more important than actually introducing a technology in the community.
So now when we are taking this technology to the new villages we are doing a lot of preparation in advance, which means we are trying to develop rapport with the people, we are trying to bring them on board, we are trying to make them aware about the risk and the need for this technology and the benefits and outcomes that lie ahead for them.
The second important aspect is that how do you create safeguards in the sense that suppose if you're using voice and text messaging to inform people about the rising water levels in the rivers and they do not work at the time of the disaster.
Suppose the lines are down, then what?
Then you have to introduce alternate means, alternate safeguard measures.
Like we have a repository of people who are connected through mobile both on the Indian Nepalese side so they can easily get in touch with the Nepalese counterpart, know the water levels even if the voice and text messaging is not working.
Third important thing, I will again say, is that how do you create formal and informal communication channels?
So formal institutional structures are important.
Their capacity building, bringing them on board is really important but more than the formal structures what is important is to have some kind of an informal exchange going on between people to people, also with the people and the government and also on both side of the borders.
This system was tested for the first time in a real world situation in 2013 floods and we have been very pleased with the results that we received.
In our analysis we found that people had the information in advance, for 88 hours in advance of the actual water entering their villages so they had enough time to basically evacuate.
Not only evacuate but actually do a lot of planning-- how to evacuate, what they need to carry along with them, what they need to leave.
So they were able to basically take care of their belongings, the food, the livestock, everything to a safer place.
And they stayed there and they came back safely so not even a single death was reported in that disaster, which in my view is a great outcome.
I mean if you look at-- from the saving lives perspective only.
But they were also able to save some of their household belongings, their livestock, which is equal to livelihoods in the rural community because a lot of your livelihoods are dependent on your livestock and it's an asset, so that again, is both linked to lives and livelihoods.
That's one aspect of it.
Some of the things that we realized that we need to give more space to the people because a lot of human potential was realized during the disaster because a lot of people came forward and we were able to see who are the emerging natural leaders from the communities.
And who could be further trained and used in similar situations, not only from the evacuation and the rescue point of view but also for taking this initiative to other villages as well.
We realized that this technology works for the first time in the real world situation so this can be scaled up.
And so we are going step-by-step now.
What we are trying to do is now we are trying to include more number of people in the repository that we have for disseminating warnings.
So there'd be more number of people so that we'd be able to cover more areas.
And we don't want to go really quick on that aspect because there is some amount of sensitivity that is involved in terms of releasing warnings in the Indian context and also in the Nepalese context.
So we want to take care that we go in a procedural manner where we take the local authorities in confidence before we release these warnings.
And so what we would certainly be-- we are taking measures to basically include more number of people, thinking that this can work for more number of people who are in the similar geography.
One of the key challenges that we face is on sustainability and scaling up.
A potential answer to this particular question on sustainability and the scaling up could be more vigorous engagements of community where we are basically downsizing the dependence on technology per se.
And we are trying to realize the fullest potential of human capital.
That is only possible with the proximity that we work with them and it's not only about communicating from distance but it's also about being physically present with them.
We don't what this initiative to be a project.
We want to make it as a process so it goes beyond the project life.
And that can only be possible when people take this initiative entirely in their own hands.
Another challenge is, you know about the DRR,
I mean DRR everyone understands that investing in DRR makes a lot of sense.
One dollar invested in DRR can actually save many more dollars.
But unfortunately, with donors, with governments,
DRR and early warning both remains a low priority issue.
Another challenge is how do you basically create a buy-in for such a initiative, which is so crucial to save lives and livelihoods of people at risk.
So one way of doing it, that you do a pilot, you create an evidence and you basically show to the policymakers that this is how it works.
So that could be one way of basically saying that "Okay, this works.
And this doesn't require too much money."
It's very important to engage women so that they are able to basically engage more women because women will only have access to women in that society.
So men would rather not have access to women.
So how do we actually bring that gender balance-- not only in our project teams-- so that there are more women in our project and they are able to talk to women and bring them on board and in turn, we can create equal participation of both men and women.
So from a community perspective, that's a major challenge looking at the cultural aspects and the social aspects of the communities that we work in.
