Hello.
This is a further lecture about the Burgo paper mill whose we have studied the roof in one of the exercises.
You can see in this picture a photo of the building when it was close to be achieved and put in operation.
It gives you an idea about the scale.
Here, I have created a model of this roof in which we can recognize the cable which we have calculated in the exercise.
Loads are hung up to this cables, these loads are hung up by means of hangers which pass through the roof, because in my case the roof, the horizontal timber element, is not heavy enough to introduce a sufficient load, that is why I have introduced this additional element.
We can also immediately notice, studying a free-body for a load which is just below the support, that this hanger is not going to load the cable but to directly introduce its internal force at the level of the support.
Thus, for the modelling of the shape of the cable,
I could have avoided to put these two loads on the left and on the right.
In the exercise, we did not take into account what was really happening in the roof and we have introduced a fixed support on the left and on the right of the structure.
Well, let's immediately notice that there is no support in the sense that the space under these two supports on the left and on the right is, in reality, empty.
That is even one of the arguments, or one of the advantages of this structure.
Well, if there is no support, what happens ?
Well, the effect of this support is replaced by the roof itself, which supports a compressive internal force.
My model here is not accurate enough but what we had in the exercise, we had indeed a little piece of roof, I draw it like this, a piece of cable, which had this shape, and obviously here, we had a certain load,
Qb, the internal force in a edge hanger, if now I distinguish both free-bodies, first the free-body of the cable which includes the load Qb, to be in equilibrium, it must have a tensile force at the support at the end of this cable, and then another free-body with the end of the roof on which acts this internal force T, well which is not anymore a tensile internal force, which is now a compressive internal force in such way that the roof is really in compression.
The structure which we have here is actually a kind of arch-cable.
Of course, what we have done in the exercise, only dealing with the cable is absolutely correct.
The cable is a cable, but the whole structure is an arch-cable.
We can also obviously notice that the whole structure looks like a suspension bridge like the Golden Gate Bridge for example.
With a particular difference, it is that, at the end of the suspension bridge, we have anchor blocks which aim at anchoring the force at the end of the cable, this internal force T which we have at the end.
Here, on the contrary, we do not have anchor blocks, why ?
Because the internal force, as I have shown it, is introduced in the roof, in the cross beam.
We thus deal with an auto-anchored suspension system. These systems are quite rare because they require, we are going to see it immediately, they require to be able to build the whole roof, or the whole element which is gonna support the compression before building the cable, which is generally impossible when we build, for example a very long suspension bridge.
Before coming to the construction process of this structure, we want to look at how it behaves under asymmetrical loads.
I draw in blue on the right and on the left the level 1 which is the level of the top of the roof before we introduce an additional load. I now introduce this load on the right and we can see that the cross beam immediately goes down and moves.
I now indicate in orange the level of the roof after the movement, I characterize it by a 2, we can see that, on the right, where the load has been added, the roof has gone down in a significant way while on the left it has gone up, also in a significant way.
What is the real behavior of the structure ?
That is a question which you have been asked, or more exactly we have asked you how could we stiffen the structure under the effect of asymmetric loads.
You first had to understand how the structure works, essentially what we can see here is that the structure works a little bit like a big swing, when we put a load on one side, well, all the structure moves, and then to increase the diameter of the cable is not going to change anything to what happens, we are not going to change anything. Likewise, to change the stiffness of the roof is not going to have an influence.
We can see that the roof here is largely stiff enough, it does not deform, or just a little bit, and then it would not have a significant influence.
Certain persons asked themselves the question, well, what happens ? Because in this lecture about the stiffening of the cables, we had said that, the use of a stiffening beam enabled to improve the behavior.
It is absolutely right, if I study for example this part of the cable, on which
I put a stiffening beam, then if I add an additional load, what is going to happen is that the yellow part and probably beyond, is going to induce that the additional load will not only go to one place, but is going to be distributed on several hangers which will induce that the cable will deform, but will deform less than under a concentrated load.
However, when we have an asymmetrical load, well, we do not prevent this movement since we have seen in the video that the movement is an overall movement.
What we could have done to stiffen the structure, it would have been to fix the roof to the pylons, at the places which I have marked with a cross, because in this way, we would have prevented the horizontal displacement and it would have as consequence that the vertical displacement would also have been low.
But we will see later, according to the construction process of the structure, that it was not really feasible.
Let's precisely look at how this roof has been built.
That is a very particular system which is not often used but that precisely an interesting example.
We can see that the pylons have been built first.
So, we have both pylons, and then the cable of the central span has been put in place with hangers, and we have set up the central part of the roof.
In this configuration, we exactly have the same configuration than for a suspension bridge, that is to say that there is no longitudinal internal forces in the roof. Afterwards, we have added the side cables on both sides, and we have simultaneously add the corresponding element of roof.
This element is in compression and it leans against the transitional part of the roof which is also in compression, which induces that the compression of the left part is offset by the compression of the right part, and the structure is in equilibrium.
If we had chosen the solution that I mentioned before, to fix the roof to the pylons, then this compression would not have passed in the central part and we should have supported this compression in the pylons, which would have led to larger dimensions for these ones.
Well, that is a very particular construction process which, as far as I know, is not very often used but, it can be used, we can be inspired by it if we want to build such an auto-anchored suspension structure.
In this lecture, we have seen that the structure of the Burgo paper mill is actually an arch-cable, with a load-bearing cable and the roof in compression, it is also an self-anchored suspension system in which we do not have anchor blocks at the ends, we have also seen how this structure has been built.
