Welcome again to our MOOC on basic steps in magnetic resonance.
Today, we shall be talking about spin relaxation.
That is the subject of Chapter 5 of Peter [Haugh's] book.
In order to observe NMR signals, as we shall see in great detail in Chapter 6, it is necessary to perturb the magnetization by applying radio frequency pulses.
Relaxation is simply the return of the magnetization to its equilibrium position along the magnetic field.
Relaxation comes in two distinct flavors.
First, there is longitudinal, also known as spin-lattice relaxation.
This is about populations.
Second, there is the transverse, sometimes called spin-spin relaxation, that is also known as decoherence in the modern world of physics.
Like many other basic aspects of magnetic resonance, relaxation was first described in the 1940s and '50s.
The names of [Maxness] and Bloch, of Bloembergen, Purcell and Pound, of [L. Ratfield], of Ionel Solomon, of Anatole Abragam and of Albert Overhauser are closely associated with these discoveries and their rationalization.
As we shall see, relaxation-- that is, the return of the magnetization to its equilibrium-- is driven by rapid fluctuations of magnetic interactions such as dipole-dipole couplings between the spins.
These fluctuations are due to motions of the molecules.
Relaxation is a bit complicated to explain, but, once understood, is one of the most attractive aspects of magnetic resonance.
Relaxation allows one to determine structures of all sorts of molecular assemblies, ranging from very simple molecules to large proteins and nucleic acids and their complexes.
The opening picture of Chapter 5 starts with this sphere here.
This sphere is not representative of a nucleus or anything of the sort; it is supposed to represent a spherical or nearly spherical molecule.
The molecule that the authors have in mind is in fact methane, which has a carbon in the center and of course four protons around it, one of which is drawn at the north pole of this sphere.
The idea is that as the methane is moving about or tumbles about, the vector that goes from the carbon to the proton is reorienting and in doing so describes a chaotic trajectory.
It turns out that this motion, which is known as rotational diffusion in our business, is responsible for relaxation, hence the relevance of this picture on the title page.
As you can see, Chapter 5 is subdivided into a number of areas.
First of all, the authors will speak about spin-lattice relaxation, also called longitudinal relaxation, because it is concerned with the magnetization that is along the static magnetic field, also known as T1 relaxation, following an abbreviation invented by Felix Bloch himself.
One of the manifestations of this longitudinal relaxation is the Overhauser Effect, which we shall discuss in some detail, and which is very important because the Overhauser Effect enables us to determine structures of molecules in solution-- in particular, of proteins and nucleic acids.
Then, there is another chapter about spin-spin relaxation, which I prefer to call transverse relaxation, because it's about the magnetization perpendicular to the magnetic field and Felix Bloch called this T2 relaxation.
A short chapter on quadrupolar relaxation, which I recommend that you read, but there is not much to say about it in pictorial terms; and then there are two long chapters, one that focuses on the applications of relaxation to determine molecular structure, and another chapter that focuses on dynamics, more specifically internal dynamics of molecules, as studied by spin relaxation.
Chapter 5 of Peter [Haugh's] book is concerned with spin-lattice relaxation.
I prefer to call it longitudinal relaxation, which is the current expression in our laboratory, or simply T1 relaxation, which is the most common way of describing it-- also in medicine, because this quantity is relevant for magnetic resonance imaging, and therefore known to all radiologists around the world.
Spin-lattice relaxation is concerned with populations, and before we speak of populations we have to remember that if we have an isolated spin 1/2-- an isolated proton, for example-- then we have the energy, which is different for the excited beta state than for the alpha state, which is in fact the ground state.
For that reason, there are more spins in the ground state, that point parallel to the magnetic field, than there are spins in the excited state.
Therefore, we should distinguish the population of the alpha state and the population of the beta state, and we can define a quantity, Δn, which is simply the difference of the population in the alpha state minus the population in the beta state.
You can see that in Boltzmann equilibrium, n(α) is larger than n(β) and consequently Δn should be positive.
Indeed, when it is in equilibrium, this quantity is called Δn equilibrium.
In some magnetic resonance experiments, we shall perturb the system so that the populations are actually equalized at the origin of time.
Then, the spins will tend to fall back from the excited state into the ground state, and in doing so, the quantity Δn, that is, the difference between the populations, will gradually recover with an exponential law so that it will ultimately converge asymptotically to the value at equilibrium.
It turns out that this law that we see here is expressed by this equation, so we have the difference in populations as a function of time, ultimately we'll determine by the equilibrium difference, that is determined by Boltzmann's Law, which depends on the field-- that is the space in between the energy levels-- it depends on the gyromagnetic ratio, it depends on the temperature.
Then, we have this little equation here which simply describes the curve that you see here, that is to say, for T = 0 we simply have 1 - 1, which is equal to zero, and for T = ∞ this e^-∞ vanishes so we have the equilibrium.
It turns out that this law, in fact, is the solution of a little differential equation, which we have here, which says that the time derivative of the difference in populations is proportional to the deviation of the difference from its equilibrium position, and that the rate that determines the speed at which these things evolve is 1 / T1.
It turns out that 1 / T1, which of course has units of seconds, is also known as R1, and this is the longitudinal relaxation rate, and we should remember that this is normally expressed in inverse seconds.
Please, do not confuse this with hertz, because although it's the same quantity, one should keep them separate from frequencies in a spectrum.
Now, these expressions could be perhaps recast in a somewhat simpler form, if we decide that we express the longitudinal component of the magnetization vector, which is proportional to Δn-- that is to say, to the differences we have seen upstairs between the alpha and the beta states.
It turns out that it's now convenient to define another quantity,
Δm(z), not to be confused with this quantity here, which is defined as m(z) at time T minus m(z) equilibrium.
This quantity also evolves with time, of course, and we can say that Δm(z) as a function of time is equal to its initial value at time zero and now multiplied by -T / T1.
These equations are simply related but it's perhaps easier to see that all that we have to look at is the distinction between the asymptotic value and the instantaneous value, and it's this quantity which, as you can see, decreases exponentially.
It turns out that the time constant T1, which is the characteristic time of this exponential recovery, varies a great deal from case to case.
For example, T1 can be on the order of a microsecond or so for quadupolar nuclei-- which have very fast relaxation, therefore also very broad lines-- such as, for example, chlorine or bromine.
T1 might be on the order of 100 milliseconds or so for protons in large biomolecules or T1 might be on the order of a second for carbon-13 or nitrogen-15 in large molecules.
Then, in some cases-- in solids in particular-- T1 might be on the order of days or even weeks in solids.
One example of that is the case of lithium fluoride, which, unfortunately, Professor Gorter at the University of Leiden in the Netherlands chose for his very first attempts to do NMR in solids in 1944.
He chose the crystal of lithium fluoride where the T1 of the fluoride-19 is in fact on the order of days or even weeks, and for that reason, once he saturated the populations, they never recovered, and therefore he couldn't see any signal at all.
Nevertheless, quite remarkably, he wrote a paper about the <i>failure</i> of an attempt to observe magnetic resonance in bulk, and the paper was published in <i>Physica</i> and it is indeed a very remarkable paper and therefore worth publishing.
Not many people can claim that.
Relaxation is driven by motion, more specifically by rotational motion in liquids.
Rotational motion is also known by the experts as rotational diffusion, as opposed to translational diffusion.
This can be illustrated by the case of a methane molecule, not in gas phase, but it would be dissolved in some sort of liquid, and then the methane molecule could have a carbon-13 at its center, and one of the four protons could initially, at time zero, so to speak, be aligned with the north pole of this diagram.
That would be at time zero.
But, if we revisit the same molecule some nanoseconds later-- in this case τ(c) is the correlation time of the diffusional motion, and if we wait one quarter of τ(c), we'll see that there is a likelihood that this C-H vector has changed its position and reoriented itself and now points somewhere else.
Most of the vectors still point somewhere in the vicinity of the north pole, but some of them have already made large excursions towards the equator.
If we wait four times longer-- that is to say, a full correlation time, τ(c)-- then we see that the dots are almost all over the place.
Although they're still clustered near the north pole, that means that many of the molecules have undergone a tumbling of some sizable amplitude.
If we wait four times longer, then we actually end up with an almost isotropic distribution of orientations-- that is to say the C-H vector has forgotten where it came from, except for a few that are still clustered near the north pole.
Now, this kind of rotational diffusion is best described by considering the scalar product between the vector at time T and the same vector a little bit later, namely at time T + τ.
Now, we can normalize this by taking the square of the amplitude of that vector, which we assume to have a constant length, as indeed is quite reasonable for a vector between a carbon and its attached proton.
This, as it turns out, is nothing but the cosine of the angle-- which depends on the time τ-- the angle between the z axis of this diagram-- that's the direction of the north pole-- and the instantaneous position of the vector.
We can also take an ensemble average of this quantity, so if we take cosθ(τ) and we take an average over all possible realizations that we see here, then in fact we see that in doing so we average over many cosine waves.
There might be a very fast cosine wave which goes like this-- that's a molecule which tumbles very rapidly-- there might be a cosine wave that's somewhat slower, and there might be one that hardly evolves at all.
If you add them up, and if you take the average, you will find that overall, the resultant of these interfering beats, as a function of time, is actually a monoexponential function which can be written -τ / τ(c).
This is not just t;
I should have written τ.
Now, the function that you see here-- we can actually give it a name.
We call it c(τ), and this is typically called a correlation function.
The correlation function that was illustrated here, starting with the simple scalar product, refers to vectors, or if you prefer, first-rank interactions.
In NMR, we are not really interested in vectors; we are interested in the time dependence of dipole-dipole interactions, and those transform like second-rank interactions.
First-rank interactions, like these vectors here, look a little bit like p orbitals, whereas second-rank interactions look like d orbitals.
Whatever the details of the mathematics, you can believe me that one can also define correlation functions for second-rank interactions.
We define a correlation function which has this type of time dependence-- that is to say it's a monoexponential decay-- which, incidentally, is attributed and associated with the name of Markov, and, in fact, we cannot measure the correlation function directly, but we can transform this into a so-called spectral density function.
The transformation of a function that depends on time into a function that depends on frequency can be achieved with an operation called a Fourier transformation.
We shall encounter this Fourier transformation in some detail in Chapter 6.
In Chapter 6, it's used for the analysis of the signal so that we obtain a spectrum.
Here, it's used for a transformation of the correlation function into a spectral density function.
If the correlation function of the second-rank interaction has this particular form: -τ / τ(c), where τ(c) is the correlation time of the rotational diffusion, then the Fourier transform will give us a spectral density which has a Lorentzian shape.
The Lorentzian function is given here explicitly, so you have τ(c) in the numerator, and, importantly,
ω² times τ(c)² in the denominator.
Of course, we can draw such a function, and it looks like this if we do not use a logarithmic scale but a normal scale.
If we have ω here, starting at zero, then it turns out that the Lorentzian will be looking something like this.
It turns out that the area under this curve, which we can, of course, express as the integral from zero to infinity, is nothing else but one, which is actually the initial value of the correlation function at time zero.
This unity here suggests a probabilistic interpretation of the spectral density function, and we can say that if we consider a certain interval, a certain surface like this, then the partial area of that surface corresponds to the probability that the motional diffusion will be undergoing frequencies between this lower limit and this upper limit, so let me call this i and j.
It turns out that a normal representation as a function of ω of this quantity, j(ω), it may be convenient to replace the scale ω with a logarithmic scale where we have log of the ratio of ω divided by some reference ω.
We can distinguish different regimes 
τ(c) long, that is to say, four times longer than 1 / ω0.
You see, the spectral density starts at a high value and drops rather quickly.
We can have a correlation time that is the inverse of ω0, in which case we have a sigmoid function like this, or a much shorter correlation time, in which case we have a long plateau here, and only a drop of the spectral density towards higher frequencies.
Spin-lattice relaxation is driven by motion, more specifically by rotational diffusion of the molecules that we are looking at, and, in fact, rotational diffusion is quantified, or can be expressed, in terms of this correlation time τ(c).
On this graph, the correlation time runs from about a picosecond,
10^-12 second-- that is appropriate for very small molecules such as water-- to 10^-8, which is ten nanoseconds-- that is appropriate for a protein of a molecular weight of about 10,000 atomic mass units or 10 kilodalton, as the molecular biologists like to say.
Now, you see that as a function of correlation time, the T1, that is, the longitudinal relaxation time, initially drops, reaches a minimum, and goes back up again.
This minimum is in the vicinity of a correlation time close to the inverse of ω0, where ω0 is, in fact, the Larmor frequency.
So, ω0 is 2π times μ0, which is 2π times the gyromagnetic ratio times the amplitude of the applied magnetic field.
So, typically, if the applied magnetic field is 9.4 tesla, and if we are looking at protons, then this will be about 400 megahertz.
We're talking about frequencies-- this is expressed in hertz or megahertz, this is expressed in radians per second, but the ballpark is 400 megahertz, so these are the frequencies of molecular motion to which NMR is sensitive, depending on the field that we apply.
As a general rule, the relaxation rate 1, which is the inverse of T1, is proportional to the spectral density taken at that particular value, ω0.
So, remember, the spectral density is a function like this, so this is ω, this is j(ω), and somewhere on the scale, we have the Larmor frequency for the nucleus in the field that we have chosen, and at that frequency the spectral density achieves a certain amplitude.
We can, of course, move this around, for example, by going to a higher field or to a lower field, or by switching, for example, from protons to carbon-13 or to nitrogen-15, etc.
But, basically, for a given nucleus in a given field, ω0 is fixed, and we only measure this.
It turns out that the rate is also proportional to the square of the amplitude of the local fluctuations of the magnetic field.
In the particular case of extreme narrowing-- that is to say, if τ(c) is smaller than 1 / ω0-- that is to say, if we are on the left side of this curve, then we can have a more explicit form for a case where the relaxation is driven by the dipole-dipole interaction.
So, this A and X refers to a pair of spins like this, one spin A, one spin X, both drawn like this.
There is a distance between them, which we simply call r, and there is a dipole-dipole interaction, which in previous chapters was called rax.
This is the magnitude of the dipole-dipole coupling.
It turns out that in the extreme narrowing regime where τ(c) is short, the relaxation rate, which is 1 / T1, is simply proportional to the square of the dipole-dipole coupling and proportional to the τ(c), the correlation time of diffusional motion.
We can replace this rax by what it contains-- that is to say, the square of the gyromagnetic ratio of nucleus A, times the square of the gyromagnetic ratio of the other nucleus.
So, if the nuclei have the same gyromagnetic ratio, then it's simply γ^4.
Then, the most important part here is that the rate is proportional to the inverse of the sixth power of the distance between A and X.
It is also proportional to τ(c), but only in the regime of short correlation times which are shorter than the inverse of the Larmor frequency.
This concludes part one of this chapter.
Thank you for your attention.
