Welcome to <i>Nature, In Code</i>.
This is Chapter 2, and this is Lecture 1.
In this lecture, I'll introduce a few key terms that we'll use throughout the course.
In the following few videos, we'll implement a simple model, and then we get coding.
I know you came here to learn how to code, and we will learn how to code in this course, but in the first few videos, it's important that we get the basics sorted out.
So the first thing I'd like to do, is to define a key term that we'll use throughout the course, and that is evolution.
Now, you may have heard of evolution, and you may have ideas about evolution and what this is, but we're a pretty quantitative course here, since we're coding.
And so, for the purpose of our course, we're gonna define <i>evolution</i> as follows, which is, the change in allele frequencies in a population, over time.
Now, let's repeat this.
The change in allele frequencies in a population, over time.
Now, if that doesn't make sense to you right now, don't worry.
It will after this video, certainly, after this course.
But this is the working definition that we'll use throughout the course.
So, in order to understand this, most of you may have not heard this term.
It's clear what a change is, it's clear what a population is, it's clear over time means, but what on Earth are these alleles?
And so, that's actually a very important concept because we'll keep talking about alleles throughout the course.
So, you probably know that the genetic information of all life is stored in this molecule, which is called <i>DNA</i>.
There's a variant of it, RNA, but details don't matter right now.
DNA stores information and stretches of this molecule are called <i>genes</i>, and these are the stretches that encode information that can be translated into proteins.
These proteins can then create cells, the cells create tissues, organs, and, ultimately, individuals.
But, if we were to transmit this genetic information from generation to generation, unchanged, and if nothing would ever change over time, all of us would have the exact same genes, then that would be quite a boring world and the world would not be as diverse as it currently is, so something else has to be there.
And what this is is that genes don't just come in one version, there isn't just <i>a</i> gene.
For every gene, there are multiple versions, okay, and these versions are called <i>alleles</i>.
So, as a simple example, we could simply assume that, here's a particular gene, somewhere along this stretch of DNA, and it comes in three versions.
And so, we're just gonna call these now, here:
Allele 1, Allele 2, and Allele 3.
And you may have a particular version of that allele.
Your friends may have other versions of those alleles.
The key takeaway message here is that genes come in different versions and these versions are called alleles.
Now, I want to give you a concrete example of what this looks like.
So, this is a map of the frequency, here, in color code, of Lactase Persistence.
<i>Lactase Persistence</i> is a feature by which adult individuals continue to produce lactase, and <i>lactase</i> being the enzyme that can digest lactose, the sugar that is in milk.
So, when humans are born, they all have the ability to digest milk.
But normally, over time, humans actually lose this ability, and as adults, are <i>lactose intolerant</i>-- they cannot digest lactose anymore.
But, a few individuals, or actually, quite many, depending on which region of the world we're looking at, have the ability to continue to digest milk as adults and those are called 
<i>lactase persistent individuals</i>.
And if you, now, look at this, a part of the map of the world, you can see quite a striking diversity of the frequency of alleles that actually generate this phenotype.
So, this is typically called <i>LCT</i>P*, this allele that causes lactase persistence.
And you can see here, for example, in this part of the world,
Southeast Asia, China, and so on, a huge amount of the human population, a huge fraction of the human population actually lives in this circle.
It's densely populated.
But you can see, there's almost no, or very little, lactase persistence in this area of the world.
On the other hand, we have parts here, in the Middle East, in western Africa, and in Europe--
I'm gonna zoom in here-- that actually have a very high frequency of lactase persistence.
So, these alleles are quite frequent in these parts of the world.
We know relatively little, there are multiple versions of these alleles that cause lactase persistence.
In the European case, it is thought to have emerged somewhere here in the Balkans probably around 7,000 years ago and has then spread throughout Europe, along with dairy farming, because if you have dairy farming and animals that produce a lot of milk that you use as a primary nutritional resource, it would be beneficial to be lactase persistent, even as an adult.
And so, it's thought that these two things spread in parallel, but this is still very active research that's going on.
But in any case, this would completely agree with our definition of evolution, namely, that this particular allele changed in frequency over time.
And, in this case, over, roughly, 7,000 years.
Now, what are the forces that can actually lead to this allele frequency change?
And, we now understand that there are four forces, four major forces, that effect allele frequencies.
The first one is probably the most famous one and it's called <i>natural selection</i>, famously discovered/described by Charles Darwin.
Now, I should note here that natural selection is by no means the only type of selection, but it is probably the most potent one, certainly the most widespread one, and certainly, also, the most well-known form of selection.
But I put natural here, in parentheses, just to make clear.
Another very important force is called genetic drift.
<i>Genetic drift</i> actually describes the change of allele frequencies due to random chance, and we learn a lot about that in Chapter 3.
It's a very fascinating process.
The third is migration, or anything to do with populations or individuals moving between populations, bringing in new genes, newly alleles.
And then, finally, last, but certainly not least, is mutation, which is the ultimate engine of creation of diversity, genetic diversity, allelic diversity.
So, what we'll do throughout this course is, we'll talk about these four forces in great detail.
And, of course, the key point about this course is that we won't just talk about it, but we will actually implement all of these four forces.
And, we'll actually have a slightly different ordering.
We'll start in the next chapter with genetic drift, and then we'll talk about mutation, then about migration, and at the end, about natural selection, so the queen of the four forces.
What we'll do in this chapter here, 
Chapter 2, is, we'll develop a model and implement that modeling code that assumes that none of these four forces is acting.
And that's a very important thing for us to do because we need a baseline to understand what actually happens in a world where none of these forces are in effect, so then, we when we later add these forces to the models, we know exactly what is, in fact, changing.
So this concludes Chapter 2, Lecture 1.
I'll see you in the next video, Lecture 2.
