Welcome back <i>Nature, In Code,</i> we're in Chapter 2, Lecture 2.
We just introduced a few key terms that we'll use throughout the course.
In this video I'd like to introduce a null model of evolutionary biology which is called the <i>Hardy-Weinberg</i> model.
So what is a null model and why should we care?
So let me start by introducing this idea of a null model.
Null model is a very important idea in all of science.
Imagine you have some kind of system and now you're applying some force to the system, and then later you may observe that the system changes, so there is some consequences possibly of you applying this force.
But how do you in fact know that the system changed
<i>because</i> you applied this force?
Is it possible that the system would have changed, or now behaves in a way that it would have anyway, without you applying this force?
And so, what you need to do in order to understand this, is you need to remove this force, need to remove all forces of interest to get to a null model that describes the system, how it would work without any of the forces that you're interested in.
We have four forces, as we just discussed in a previous video, that we now understand, are major forces to affect evolution and to affect the composition and the allele frequencies in populations.
And so what we need to do is we need to ensure that none of those four forces is acting, in order to get to our null model.
And this model in evolutionary biology is in fact a very famous model, and it's called the <i>Hardy-Weinberg</i> model, named after the two people who invented this model,
Hardy and Weinberg, a long time ago.
And so this is a very, very simplified model of the world, but it helps us understand what would happen if nothing happens, so to speak.
What does the world look like from a population genetic perspective if none of those four forces is acting?
So you open up any textbook on population genetics or evolutionary biology, Hardy-Weinberg is right there at the beginning because we need to understand what happens without any of those four forces, and then we can later slowly add the forces one by one, either in combination or as single forces, and then we can understand much better what happens <i>because</i> of those forces.
So we'll implement this very shortly in JavaScript.
This is our null model where we begin from.
From a biological perspective, what we'll do is we'll of course use this concept of passing on genetic material throughout the generations-- this is DNA-- and we also assume a model that is typically found in animals, and that is that of diploid individuals.
So if you don't recall what this is from biology class back in school-- in fact, most animals are <i>diploid, </i> which means that in each of your cells, in fact, not only have one copy of your genetic material, but <i>two</i> copies, and hence the word diploid.
And this is true for almost all animals.
There are some cells and also some animals that are haploid, and plants are in fact very fascinating because they have even more complex cells, and more complex genetic systems where you have three, four, or even more copies, but for the context of this course, we'll focus on humans or animals, and we'll focus on diploid systems.
It turns out that even though that practically all of your cells are diploid, some of them are actually haploid and this is really important from an evolutionary perspective, because it is those cells that are actually used for sexual reproduction.
So imagine a human body-- and I'm going to obviously simplify things dramatically-- but a bunch of cells, all of these cells are diploid, so have two copies of the genetic material.
Through a process that is called <i>meiosis--</i> this isn't that important, but it's a process, a very important process called meiosis-- these haploid cells are created, that have only one copy.
Okay, of course multiple ones.
And we call these haploid cells, <i>gametes.</i>
And these are used for sexual reproduction.
So let's say you have another individual over here that's of course also diploid.
Also each cells have two copies of the genetic material.
Same thing, through a process called meiosis, this individual produces gametes, which are haploid.
And now these two individuals can engage in sexual reproduction, each of them providing one gamete.
So you pick one gamete here, and you pick one gamete here, and these then fuse and create the first cell of a new individual, a new generation.
And this new cell here, is called a <i>zygote,</i> and because it fused those haploid cells, this cell is now again diploid.
And so now through regular development, from this first single cell a new body will be formed, that will of course be composed of many, many cells, and that will be all diploid cells.
And so the model that we're using here is that you have here, the gamete coming from this individual, so this would be this copy here, and you have the gamete here coming from this individual, that would be this copy here.
And, by the way, in males we call these gametes, <i>sperm cells,</i> and in females we call these gametes, <i>eggs.</i>
And then these cells here in development, would obviously just be copies of that cell.
But it's important for the model, to be reminded of this underlying basic biology that you have one copy of your genetic material from your father, and one copy from your mother.
In reality here, thousands or, in fact, tens of thousands of genes are being passed on from one generation to the next.
We'll simplify things quite a bit in order to keep things trackable.
What we'll do is we'll focus on one single gene.
Let's call this the "A" gene.
And the simplest model we can think of in terms of an interesting model is a gene that actually comes in two versions, namely, allele A1 and allele A2.
So if we're interested in a change in allele frequencies, we need at least two alleles otherwise if you only have one allele, that allele is always going to be at the 100% and nothing will ever change.
But this is the simplest model we can come up with.
If we have two alleles, and we're talking about diploid cells, that means we can package those alleles into a cell in three different ways: either we can say both copies are A1 A1; or we can say both copies are A2 A2; or we can say the intermediary, one copy's A1 and the other copy is A2.
And so these two types are in fact called <i>homozygous,</i> because they both have the same copy-- in this case A1, this case A2-- the same type of allele.
These cells are called <i>heterozygous</i> because they have different types, and in this case they have, one copy's the A1 allele, and the other copy is the A2 allele.
So these are important terms that we'll use throughout the course.
Now let's think about an example.
Let's say, there's a population of 100 individuals that you study.
You can now go in and you can analyze the genetic makeup of that population.
And you can basically count how many of those individuals are of one of those three types.
Now let's say you find the following genotypes-- so these three sets of alleles are called <i>genotypes.</i>
Let's say you find, of the A1 A1 you find 15 inidividuals, of the A1 A2 you find, let's say, 50 individuals, and of the A2 A2 genotype, you find 35.
So those, of course, add up to 100 individuals, and so in percentage points, the frequencies-- because you have exactly 100 individuals, that's easy to calculate-- are 15%, 50% and 35%.
So these are your genotype frequencies at the moment where you measured this population.
Now we can in fact deduce from these numbers the allele frequencies.
How do we do that?
Well, let's take a look at these numbers.
We have 15 individuals, we have 50 individuals of A1 A2, and finally we have 
35 individuals of A2 A2.
And for simplicity we now just consider these individuals to be a single cell.
So we can actually go in-- a single cell with one gene is an extremely simplified world-- but we can now go in and actually count the alleles that we have.
So how many alleles do we have here?
Well, we have 15 individuals that have two copies of the A1 allele, so that means we have 30 A1 alleles here.
Here, these individuals, A1 A2, they provide 50 A1 alleles, but they also provide 50 A2 alleles.
Okay, they're alleles.
And then these guys down here,
35 individuals each have two copies of the A2 allele, so they provide 70 A2 alleles.
And now if you add those up, here we have, in fact, 80 A1 alleles, and here we have 120 A2 alleles.
If you sum those up you get in total 200 alleles, and that's exactly as it should be because remember we have 100 individuals.
Those individuals are diploid, so they have two sets of the genetic material each, so there are 200 alleles in this model.
And now because we know 
80 out of 200 are A1, that means our allele frequency for the A1 is 40%, and our allele frequency of A2 is 120 by 200, that's 60%.
So those are now our allele frequencies.
So here we have genotype frequencies, and here we have our allele frequencies.
So this is the population the way we currently observe it.
What we want to understand next is if we now go to the next generation, how do these frequencies change?
So this concludes Chapter 2, Lecture 2.
I'll see you in the next video of Chapter 2, Lecture 3.
