Welcome back: Nature, In Code.
We're in Chapter 2 lecture 3.
In this video, we'll finish our investigation of the Hardy Weinberg model.
After that we'll get coding.
So here's where we left off.
We started with this population of three different genotypes,
A1A1, A1A2, and A2A2, and we observed those at 15% frequency,
50% frequency, and 35% frequency, and from that we deduced the A1 and A2 allele frequency is at 40% and at 60%.
So these are the genotype frequencies, and these are allele frequencies.
So what I'm now going to do is,
I'm actually going to stick with these percentage points.
We started discussing a small population of 100 individuals, but actually I want to really just stick with these percentage points now, rather than absolute numbers for a very important reason, because the Hardy Weinberg model actually makes a number of assumptions that are important, and that are simplifying, and one of the key assumptions is that of an infinite population size.
Now what that means is that it doesn't make sense to talk about absolute numbers, because if the population size is infinite, then these numbers here would also be infinite.
So we need, in fact, to talk about percentages.
Now, why do we do this?
Why do we make the assumption about an infinite population size?
Well, it's quite simple. if we were to make an assumption of a finite population size and potentially, in fact, a small population size, then we would get effects of random chance and this would be genetic drift.
But remember, we want to develop a null model that doesn't have any of the four forces that we described in the first video.
So we need to assume an infinite population size, not to get any of those effects of genetic drift.
Another simplifying assumption is that of non-overlapping generations.
Non-overlapping generations.
So, when a new generation is born, the old generation dies immediately.
There's no overlap and that makes things very simple with the bookkeeping.
Also, we have sexual reproduction, and it is in fact completely random.
We don't really have now any sort of gender, any sort of sex, male-female.
It's just basically like molecules bumping into each other in a gas, or in our case, alleles bumping into each other at random, generating new genotypes, or new frequencies of these genotypes.
And finally, I just want to repeat, that we have not none, okay, of those four forces.
So we have no genetic drift, no selection whatsoever, no mutation, and no migration.
And again, I'd like to just mention briefly, why are we using such a simplified model? because we clearly understand that some of these assumptions are violated in nature, so they're not completely accurately describing nature.
Well, the best analogy I can maybe offer is that of a map.
So assume you want to go from point A to point B, and those points are maybe something like 100km apart from each other.
Now, you'd like to have a map that tells you how you have to go from A to B, but of course this map will be a very simplified representation of the real world.
It will only have a few key components.
For example, you know roads, how you get there from A to B, maybe there's a town over here and maybe there's a forest over here, but you get the idea.
Almost everything is missing from this map, this map is a very simplified, artificial version of the world, but it helps you navigate from A to B.
In fact, if you were to build an increasingly realistic map.
First of all, you wouldn't see the details on this scale, and if you would like to see the details on this scale you would eventually get to a one-to-one map, a map that describes the world in complete detail.
But this would be a terrible map,
I mean it would be 100km in diameter, and so it would be completely useless.
So think about models like this like you think about a map, you simplify down to the essential components.
So now that we have these numbers in place, let's calculate what the next generation would look like.
So what would the next generation of genotype frequencies look like?
So we have three different types of genotypes.
So how do I actually create these genotypes?
Well, the way to think about this, visually, is now that you have this infinitely-sized gamete pool, and in this gamete pool we have two types of alleles, and 40% of those alleles,
40% of the gamete pool, is of type A1 allele, 60% is of A2.
So when you want to generate an A1A1 genotype, you first have to pick an A1 allele, and that happens with a probability of 0.4, because that is the frequency of this allele.
But to generate an A1A1, you have to not only pick one but a second A1 allele as well, and so the probability of that is also 0.4.
So the total probability is 0.16.
Now this next simple case is A2A2.
Same logic: you have to pick any two alleles, and then you have to pick another A2 allele, and this happens with the frequency of this allele, and so the combined probability here is 0.36.
Now you know these two have to add up to one, and so you could already calculate what the probability of the A1A2 is.
But just to be explicit, an A1A2 can be generated either by picking an A1 allele, and then an A2, or it can be generated by first picking an A2 and then an A1.
And so if you add these two together, you get 0.48.
Okay, so in other words, our new genotype frequencies are now 16%, for the A1A1, for the A1A2, we have 48%, and for the A2A2, we have 36%.
And if we compare this with the previous values that we had, previously we had here 15%, so the A1A1 genotype frequency increased by one percent.
Same with the A2A2.
In fact, we started with 35%, we're now at 36%.
So again, an increase of 1%.
On the other hand, with the A1A2 we started with 50%, but we lost 2% to the homozygotes, and so we're now at 48%, so a loss of 2%.
Now, these are very important frequencies, and I'll tell you why in a second.
But I want you to keep those frequencies in mind.
Okay.
So what are the allele frequencies in this new generation?
Well, that we can easily deduce as well, just like we did before.
So remember we have here the A1A1 genotype at 16%.
All of those, of course, go to the A1 alleles.
Of the A1A2 we have 48%.
Half of those are A1 alleles, so 24% goes to the A1 allele, and 22... let me just do this with an arrow,
24% go to the A2 alleles, because half of them are A2 alleles.
And here, of A2A2, all the 36% are, of course, A2 alleles.
And so if you add these numbers together, 16 plus 24 is 40, so 40 for the A1, and 60 for the A2.
And now look at this-- same allele frequencies,
40% A1, 60% A2.
So the allele frequencies in fact did not change.
And why should they?
Remember in this model, we got rid of all the forces that are known to affect the A1 and A2, or just any type of allele frequency, so it's completely in line with our model that the allele frequencies do in fact not change, they remain constant, or in other words, we have no evolution as we defined it.
For evolution, we need a change in these numbers over time, but this doesn't happen-- it stayed constant, 40% and 60%.
The genotype frequencies change slightly: +1%, -2%, +1%, but nevertheless they changed within one generation.
So we could now move on and ask ourselves, okay, let's move on one generation, what happens then?
So we could now calculate these genotype frequencies again for the next generation, and how would we do that?
Well, we would simply go through this exact same calculation, but as you can see here, it will actually be useless to do this calculation, because we just did it, and these calculations are based on the allele frequencies here:
40% and 60%, and we just said, well, these values don't change, so the results here are not going to change either.
We can keep calculating this again and again and again.
Of course it will always be the same values.
And so these values in fact now, these genotype frequencies will also remain constant, and the reason why I highlighted these is because these are very important frequencies, because those are now the Hardy Weinberg frequencies.
And these are incredibly important frequencies, because what the Hardy Weinberg, what the model essentially says is that whatever frequencies we start with, within one generation will go into these Hardy Weinberg frequencies.
The allele frequencies don't change, but the genotype frequencies, they may change, within one generation, and then they'll stay there at these
Hardy Weinberg frequencies forever.
I want to finish this by explaining, in a graphic, what this looks like in a plot, because we could essentially plot these values over time.
So here we would have time in generations.
And so we would have generation 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, and if we would now plot here the allele frequencies, okay, allele frequencies, we would start with any two values, and in fact we would... we would have constant values here over time, so two straight lines.
Now the plot for the genotype frequencies, so again, time in generations, would look similar, but slightly different.
So here we would have the genotype frequencies, what we would have here are three values, in our current model, and we could perhaps now assume that one of them goes down, and the other two go slightly up.
Okay.
So they change within one generation, but then from there, they will in fact remain constant.
And these values here now, these are the Hardy Weinberg genotype frequencies.
And this sums up the Hardy Weinberg model.
So in the Hardy Weinberg world the allele frequencies don't change, number one.
Number 2, the genotype frequencies,
If they're not at Hardy Weinberg, then they will get there within one generation, and then they will remain there forever.
So we've now learned about this null model of evolutionary biology, which is the Hardy Weinberg model.
It has a number of consequences that we just discussed.
Now, what we'll need to do is we'll finally need to get coding, and implement this model in JavaScript, and we'll start doing that in the next video. I'll see you there.
