Good Morning!
Today, our course will be on the planning of protected areas. the book to consult as reference, will be the guidelines of IUCN for the management planning of protected areas, edited once again by the world commission of protected areas.
You can also find a lot of information in our study of management plans in french-speaking Africa on our website papaco.org.
Today, two colleagues from IUCN PAPACO will help me.
It's Bora Masumbuko, who is based in Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso, and Lacina Kone who is based in Niamey, Niger.
Both have good experience in the preparation of management plans.
So the first question that we are going to ask ourselves, is to know what this management plan is for.
The management plan, is a document that helps to guide the Manager on how he should manage his protected area.
It documents and identifies the values to preserve in the protected area.
It clearly establishes the goals that must be achieved and identifies the actions that must be in place to achieve those goals.
It is a document that allows to plan in time and is interested in the present and future.
It allows to respond concretely to the following questions:
What will be done?
How will it be done ? and when will it be done?
It is therefore an essential tool to help the Manager.
And for this, it must remain concise and clear.
The plan is a useful tool to improve the management of the protected area. it allows a better use of financial and human resources, as it allows to plan activities in time, therefore the cost and the need of human resources are equally evaluated.
Finally - and this is very important- the management plan increases the manager's responsibility, in obtaining results.
It also improves the communication between all stakeholders, involved in the management of protected areas.
OK, all that is easy to understand.
So, what are the principles that should guide us when we wish to create a management plan for a protected area and if possible, of course, a very good plan.
To develop a management plan with efficiency and transparency, it is essential to include a number of principles.
First of all, all the stakeholders have to participate, given that their level of involvement may have an impact on the success of the planning exercise.
At first, one must identify all of the participants involved then approach them with transparency to involve them in planning.
Next, the documents which will be use as the source of information. should be elaborated in a clear accessible manner and should take into account cultural or linguistic constraints.
Furthermore, communication is a key element when approaching stakeholders, because they must perceive that they are an integral part of the planning process.
They must be considered as partners, and not obstacles of nature conservation.
Thus, it is important to respond positively to meeting requests, to consider all points of view, and to give each party time to formulate their opinions.
If it becomes necessary, undertake some research before taking a decision that is not consensual and then return the result to interested parties.
Regardless of the complexity of the management plan, it needs to apply those simples principles to guide the planification process and to guarantee that eventually the management plan will be a useful document accepted by all.
We know now what the plans are for and we know the principles of their preparation.
Let's see the steps to follow.
When we are consulting different plans we see that they do not all contain the same informations or, are not presented the same way.
This is not a serious issue.
To help elaborate those documents,
IUCN published guidelines for management planning of protected areas.
This document presents, in 13 steps, how to prepare such a plan.
Those 13 steps can roughly be summarized as follows:
First of all, the pre-planning phase, data collections and initial fieldwork; then comes the evaluation of data and information on the ressources to form sufficient arguments that will help in the identification of the protected area values; then we move on to identifying pressures and threats that the values previously defined are facing, and we identify constraints of the protected area territory.
From this analysis of values, and the number of threats they are facing we deduct a long term vision for the protected area as well as short-term management goals and the activities helping to achieve those goals, i.e activities that will stop the threats to resources and to heritage values of the protected area.
It is then, that we write a first draft of the plan we want to launch and make it available to all the different stakeholders for a public consultation.
The plan can then be rightfully approved and endorsed.
We must understand the development of a management plan is an evolving process.
In general, a plan is designed for a period of 5 to 7 years and is regularly revised to adapt the management of the protected area to the realities of the field.
All the steps in the management plan are important, but we will spend time on some key steps of the process.
The pre-planning is the step that allows the preparation and the logistics for the development of the management plan.
It must lead to the establishment of the terms of reference, of the budget and method to follow.
It also allows helps to identify the team for the preparation of the plan
- this is a crucial point, because too often it comes down to entrusting the work to an outside expert, while it is essential that managers themselves, the actors of the area themselves, feel involved in this work.
Obviously, an outside expert can be an added as support, but should never be the main leader in the planning.
Within this phase of pre-planning we also identify a provisional timetable for the process of preparation of the management plan up to its approval and then we make it public.
Step 3, is about the protected area’s values.
This assumes that we are engaged in the process and have already collected data on the protected area.
Then what is the heritage value of the protected area?
It is simply what justifies the creation and existence of this area in other words, it is a heritage, i.e a value that belongs to everybody, and that is important to preserve for future generations.
They are identified from known informations and data on the protected area in a participatory manner with all parties of its outskirts involved.
It is obviously essential to know the heritage values of a protected area, because the purpose of the protected area is precisely to maintain those heritage values.
Then let us ask how we can establish the heritage value of a protected area?
It's simple, we have to ask ourselves for example, if the area is home to exceptional cases of natural, scenic, cultural, scientific, ecological, floristic values or of essential resources for the local communities or of rare and indigenous animals and plants.
This 3rd step is crucial but difficult to implement, because those values can be subjective, misunderstood or poorly advertised.
Yet it is those values that will form the basis in identifying the threats and constraints that affect the protected area and will guide the choices of actions undertaken to preserve the area.
All the other steps will ultimately be linked to the results of identifying the values.
The last step of the planning process is the review of the plan.
It consists in deciding when and how we will update the management plan.
This implies that all other steps were realized correctly including the monitoring and review.
In numerous case, the plan is updated at least every ten years.
The review usually starts around one to two years before the scheduled end of the management plan, to leave the necessary time to collect the data on indicators, to analyze them, to consult all the stakeholders and to validate a new plan.
In case of delay, we will continue to use the previous version of the plan, and this cannot differ from the pursuit of essential activities.
So, we know now the most important part.
Take time to consult the management plans of parks that you are familiar with, and if you do not have access to those documents,
Look at what we have made available to you on the platform.
Analyze their structure, identify their strength and weakness if there is any, think about what you would change.
This is the end of this class. the next episode will be on the planning of protected areas network.
This implies a change of scale to plan at the level of several areas.
Have an excellent day!
