Hello.
This sequence will be on monitoring results and management planning.
First, we will go over different principles of monitoring, its definition, its role, the different types and levels of monitoring, who takes part and conducts them.
Then we will spend a few minutes on two points in particular, a bit more innovative.
I have chosen an example of participatory monitoring and one example of a monitoring chart.
Let's look at this together.
What is monitoring?
It's a regular observation over time of the same elements, on the same sites so that one can follow and measure the long-term evolution of these elements.
Usually, in relation to a reference condition established in advance.
Allow me to emphasize important words in this definition
First of all: regular.
Same elements, same sites, to measure the evolution in the long run.
These elements are important.
These mean that monitoring cannot be improvised.
It must be planned and organized.
It requires financing, competence and long-term commitment.
Let's take a look at the reasoning behind and the use of this monitoring.
The results are important for a number of stakeholders.
As you can see here, monitoring has 3 essential functions:
To guide the managers, to adapt, adjust, evaluate and prepare the next management plan.
It's in this case a feedback process towards the different departments and functionalities of the protected area.
Secondly, to inform more extensively the decision-makers and the backers.
These means providing feedback to the board of directors, to the donors, who will ask questions like "What's the use of the protected area?"
"What's its purpose?" or "How are things going in your area?"
Here we are looking for elements of efficiency, performance, elements about the site's value and impacting measures.
Finally, monitoring has a role in raising awareness.
The goal is to inform all of the actors contributing to the management of the protected area.
It's an effort of communication and appropriation.
It is then necessary to build upon the information by using communication and organization tools: debriefing meetings, brochures like this one, to inform all the stakeholders.
I would like to emphasize the 2 levels of monitoring that I think are important: the first one is the monitoring of management efficiency and of the management plan implementation.
Here we need to identify if the management plan is correctly executed, if its goals are met, if its progress is appropriate, at what level of financial efficiency and effectiveness of means, we need to learn from its implementation, the processes underway, from what worked and what didn't work.
At what point the management cycle failed or succeeded.
It is also about adapting the management's decisions when problems occur in the implementation.
Monitoring can be used to redistribute resources and efforts differently to improve the implementation.
Note that these issues will be studied more in detail in the sequence 4.2.
The second level is about monitoring impacts and the site's evolution.
This monitoring of course is also linked to the previous one but it has specific characteristics that I would like to point out.
It goes further than the previous one.
We take into account, if possible the impacts of the management, but also the evolution of the context, threats and changes in the environment.
This kind of monitoring goes further in the evaluation of the results and in protecting the site.
It also intends to study the changes taking place.
Different types of impacts monitoring can be implemented.
Firstly biological and ecological monitoring which will measure the health of the environment; for example the reef, the species population, and biodiversity.
Sequence 4.4 will bring you more on this subject, such as how to conduct ecological monitoring, etc.
Very important but rarely used: socioeconomic monitoring, which allows the measuring of the socioeconomic status of communities living inside or outside of the protected areas.
This allows to identify usage of space and resources, actors' perception, pressure and improvements brought by the protected areas on the quality of life, economic health and well-being of the populations.
Of course, most of the time we also study some iconic species: turtles, some mammals, birds, representative of the protected area.
Lastly, I think that it is also important to emphasize the monitoring of some activities relevant to the protected area.
For example, in the case of an AMP, we will keep an eye on fishing activity.
In other protected areas, touristic activities are important.
Who will conduct those studies?
Who will monitor them?
Generally, these studies are conducted by scientists, managers and by the park staff.
Sometimes with the help of the populations.
We will talk about this more later.
Note that some of these monitoring activities require some very scientific methods.
Most of the time, the monitoring must be thorough, and done in a consistent way.
This requires important financial resources and sophisticated skills.
Other times, it needs to be suitable for a less knowledgeable public.
The level and quality of information will therefore substantially change, and so will its purpose.
One needs to manage these different levels, the different capabilities of the protected area, and the funding available.
I will now present two examples of monitoring with different approaches: first, an example of participatory monitoring, which will involve communities, and then a second example that will focus on the restitution and communication of the results.
For this first example, we will look at an example of participatory monitoring.
Again, note that the scientific method must be thorough, but in this case, a large part of the work is given to the communities.
Here, in this example in West Africa, these women have been trained and asked to conduct the monitoring of shellfish.
Note that the implementation of such a task is interesting to mobilize communities, to strengthen their relation to their surroundings.
It can also be less expensive, but be wary, it's not always the case.
Note also that this method usually requires more time because of the training and the supervisory staff needed.
I would advise you to study this document wich is entitled: "Guide de suivi participatif des coquillages exploités en Afrique de l'ouest" for a more detailed explanation.
$$(Jingling sound from the shells in the bucket)
Sorting by size is carried out for each bucket.
Sorting is done thanks to a column of sieves and there are 13 buckets,
12 of which have holes which vary between
.5 and 6cm.
The last one traps remainders.
$$(The woman is counting out loud)
Numbers in each bucket are logged and the data analyzed so as to obtain figures on population density, average size and population structure.
For this second focus,
I would like to introduce you to an initiative from l'Agence Française des Aires Marines Protégées, which has been producing monitoring charts for some years now.
Let me remind you again that the principles used for this monitoring are the same as those given at the beginning of this session: thoroughness, method and consistency.
Here we have a rather interesting example of a restitution.
This tool has been developed thanks to a partnership between the managers, scientific associates, communities and in partnership with several marine protected areas.
Note that this tool is very useful in a communication process.
It's very visual.
All of the data is gathered.
Therefore we have a dashboard with the evolution of all the factors.
The graphical aspect makes it easy to follow.
This allows for an easier way to communicate with all audiences.
What is also interesting in this example is that the monitoring has been done on 2 levels: on both the scale of a single protected area, and of a network of protected areas, to provide some degree of consistency.
In summary, I would like to insist on some aspects of this monitoring.
First there is a strong concern in measuring the management impacts.
For that reason, what we just saw, biological monitorings, and socioeconomic monitoring are very important, even if they are not often used and if they need a lot of resources.
Please also note that several levels of monitoring are generally put in place in protected areas: the monitoring of species, the monitoring of management indicators, the monitoring of the general context, the monitoring of global impacts; all of this implies a strong and efficient coordination and sometimes a prioritization, due to means and resources not always being available.
Finally, note in summary the need to build up on the monitoring.
It's not enough to have all the data, you need to also analyze and communicate these results to all the parties involved.
You should not hesitate to use graphic tools, charts, visual tools to render this information.
That's it, this sequence is completed, have a nice day!
