Hello. 
Today, we will talk about transboundary protected areas.
This will help show some of the aspects on how to plan protected areas and their outskirts that we have studied in this module.
The reference book for this class is the guidelines of the World Commission on Protected Areas, on transboundary conservation.
First of all, a transboundary protected area is a protected area.
It is therefore a territory dedicated to nature's conservation.
We can see here a map of the regional area
W, spread across three countries
- Burkina, Niger and Benin - and formed by three parks that have the same name, and are all of category
A transboundary protected area is specific in that it spreads beyond a national border, so there is no more separation between the countries involved.
Therefore, the flow of people and animals are usually freely possible.
We are going from managing each park separately to creating an area with a relatively shared management.
We might - roughly- see three types of transboundary areas.
The ones that gather two adjacent protected areas
- I draw them here as an example -
These protected areas are then simply separated by a border.
These are transboundary protected areas.
For example,
The W,that we just studied, evolves toward this pattern.
Another type of transboundary protected area gathers two or several protected areas connected by territories of another status; this complex is called a transboundary conservation landscape.
The W parks are a good example, because they are transboundary parks that are connected to other parks - such as
Pendjari, Arly's park etc - by territories of another status: reserves, hunting areas, and pastoralism areas.
It all shapes a landscape called the "W Arly
Pendjari", named after the main parks it's composed by.
Such as the the combination named KAZA, which stands for Kavango Zambezi, in Southern Africa that spreads out over several countries - Namibia, Angola,
Zambia, Zimbabwe and Botswana - and is composed of certain famous parks such as Chobe in Botswana Kafue in Zambia or Hwange in Zimbabwe.
All these territories which are parks, are connected through other areas of different status, and shape this transboundary landscape which is delineated by the white line here and that is obviously huge.
The third type of transboundary protected area gathers different territories, some of which are protected - but not all of them are - and that are necessary to maintain migrations of certain species, for example here, zebras or wildebeest in
Eastern Africa.
In that case, it's more a transboundary conservation area rather than a transboundary protected area strictly speaking.
Having several countries working together for conservation makes sense when we know that a third of important biodiversity areas straddle at least one border.
Over 300 transboundary parks are now formally established in the world, such as here the big Limpopo that connects
Southern Africa and Mozambique.
Trans-national collaboration is a logical necessity, when, for example, we look at a species like the lesser flamingos that migrate between
Kenyan lakes in the Rift valley but reproduce in Tanzania.
All of them.
Working on one side of the border without looking at the other side wouldn’t make sense in that case.
Collaboration of parks beyond borders helps spreading the collectively protected surface area, developing shared activities, such as patrols against poaching, or improving the overall park resilience and its capacity to adapt to change.
Brice is giving us the example of TNS in Central Africa.
TNS gathers a few protected areas, three national parks of category 2, between Congo, Cameroun and CAR.
We already have seen the progress: an anti-poaching squad was created by the three states, protocols about free movement of TNS employees were written, and there is an eco-toursim tour.
Not to omit the FTNS fund that was created to finance activities at the three transboundary desks, like in RCA, Cameroun.
Also, cross-border collaboration helps make a location more attractive and grow its economic potential; for example, for tourism or other economic activities.
We can see here Mara's plains connected to
Serengeti.
Even though there isn't a transboundary collaboration yet, the ecosystem is overall important.
Off course, establishing transboundary collaborations happens to be relatively complicated, because it demands high level agreements, between governments of different countries.
Also, after a concrete collaboration on the field, between protected areas from each side of the borders.
The challenge is to build transboundary governance systems that are operational.
The model has been developed in Southern Africa, as we see here, around the TFCA that stands for
Transfontier Conservation Areas.
We can see here the KAZA, that we studied five minutes ago.
Sometimes, the idea that these territories might reinforce peace between countries triggered the creation of such areas.
These are the famous "Peace Parks", that have developed between several countries of this district.
They helped connecting wide conservation territories, reopening the crossings for animals and bringing human closer - in theory.
We can see here the opening of big Limpopo, of which we talked - between Southern Africa and Mozambique- by
Nelson Mandela in 2001.
In francophone Africa, the movement isn't that advanced but begins to take shape.
The W example is interesting, and is briefly introduced by Pierre Kafando, who was the W conservator in Burkina during a few years.
The W regional park is well protected.
It overlaps three borders of three states: Benin, Burkina and Niger.
This area was specifically created to protect and maintain biodiversity, and associated national and cultural resources.
The park spreads out over a 10 300 km2 area and is part of one of the biggest protected system of African savannah: the W-Arly-Pendjari complex.
The W regional park was created during the colonial period, which is when these three countries belonged to the territory of French West Africa.
The area of the W was poorly populated because of the tsetse fly, that gives sleeping sickness, and other diseases such as osteoporosis We can add to this the richness of the area wild fauna.
It's only in 1927 that it was classified as a sanctuary park.
Between 1952 and 1953 the High Commissioner of the Republic, general governor of West Africa, signed national by-laws, making this sanctuary park a state classified forest and a wildlife reserve.
One of the challenges of this collaboration is the reinforcement of regional integration through the theme: conservation, management and appreciation of biodiversity.
For the W regional park, this appreciation goes though tourism development, some products exploitation, acknowledged as common right by the resident communities, and handcraft, agricultural and socio-cultural activities on the outskirts.
The socio-economic advantages are: revenues to the states, especially public funds, private operators, tourist camps guides and managers, hunt guides in the ouskirts zones, and outskirts communities, organized as associations.
There is also the reinforcement of the stakeholder's capacity: touristic guides, hotels camps managers, and collaboration between populations on each side of the borders.
There were travels, people who helped organize, which also helped diminish the conflict about the use of resources and trades in these communities.
Finally, there is the populations participation to different land-use and monitoring activities, which allow the empowerment but also appropriation of activities, and generates revenues.
That's the end of the class, next episode will be about the
Aïchi targets, linked to the Convention on
Biological Diversity.
