This module allowed us to understand how much the planning of protected areas is an important tool that allows protected areas to achieve their conservation purpose.
To be effective, the planning must follow a consistent approach, simple and universal.
The goal is to evaluate the values of the protected areas and the pressure they are up against, and then define a vision and goals that we wish to attain to preserve those values in the long term.
The organization of management activities will then follow naturally.
Two rules, among others are necessary.
The planning must be done in a participatory manner, including all stakeholders, in and around the protected area, but it should also be implemented directly by those who will put it in practice and not just outsourced to experts.
Whatever the scale, around one protected areas or an entire network, or even more in cases including regions combining both development and preservation, this approach will stay the same, determining first the values and then their conservation.
Of course, the stakeholders involved in the process will be different people.
For a given site, it will be all the actors directly influencing the area and its surroundings: the managers, the communities, the private sector.
For a good network of protected areas, there should be a detailed consultation, and the planning will be based on an analysis of the shortcomings at the national level to determine the key zones to protect and preserve the biodiversity in its fullness as well as the connectivity between these areas.
The network will try to include all management categories, and all kinds of forms of governance to be more efficient.
Lastly, for the integrated planning of a land in its entirety, a judicious development should be chosen which will allow to protect resources in the long run while taking into account the inhabitant's needs.
Thus, the planning will involve all of the participants in the development and land-use planning of the concerned area.
The monitoring of the protected areas is a decisive part of the planning.
A wise choice is needed from the start of which indicators to measure to be able to evaluate the impact on the management actions.
Those indicators, measured during the implementation of the management plan, will allow us to understand what works and what doesn't, and adjust the actions along the way.
It's a repetitive process called adaptive management.
This monitoring will have three essential functions: guide the manager, as previously explained, fully inform the decision-makers and raise the awareness of the stakeholders concerned about the management of the protected area.
Finally, the Convention on Biologic Diversity allows us to plan for conservation on a global scale by fixing quantifiable targets, like Aïchi targets; it helps us define conservation strategies for each nation, to building protected areas networks which will include all the important ecosystems present on Earth.
That's it, you can now starts the test of this module.
