Reference Frames: all of the orbits and orbital motions that we'll talk about from now on will be always with respect to a certain reference frame, but we'll describe these reference frames here.
First of all, that's one that is pretty classic and well-known.
It's the geographic coordinate system.
You have the Meridian of Greenwich here and you have a North latitude going towards the North Pole and the South latitude going toward the South Pole and there's the East longitude and the West longitude here, so this is well known; this is not really for describing orbits but positions on the surface of planet Earth.
This is a fundamental coordinate system.
First of all, it's an inertial coordinate system.
Again, all of the motion that we have talked about so far, that we'll talk about later, are always with respect to inertial frame.
Again, inertial frame is the frame of reference XYZ, all perpendicular to each other, orthogonal, with respect to which the laws of motion, the laws of Newton, are valid.
Now, for the geocentric inertial coordinate system the center of the coordinate system is the center of the Earth.
The plane of reference, and it's important to always consider for each reference frame, a plane of reference.
The plane of reference in our case is the plane of the Equator and we have X and Y of this orthogonal coordinate system.
In the plane of reference, the direction of X is the direction of the vernal equinox.
This is a point on the Equator that the Sun is crossing when it goes from the southern celestial hemisphere to the northern celestial hemisphere.
It's a point crossed around the 21st of March.
It just happens, and we'll talk about this in a few minutes, that this point is very slowly migrating to the west so when we'll talk about geocentric-inertial coordinate system, we have to specify which year we are talking about.
Normally it's the year 2000 that we use now.
Now, the Y axis is perpendicular to X, of course, and is also in the reference plane, which is the Equator, and the Z axis is perpendicular to X and Y and to the North Pole.
The heliocentric-inertial coordinate system has the same directions of axes as the one we talked about before, the geocentric-inertial coordinate system.
The only difference is that the center of the coordinate system is in the center of the Sun.
Again, the axes are perpendicular to the ones of the geocentric-inertial coordinate system with the X directed to the vernal equinox for the year 2000.
Precession of the equinoxes.
Now, it happens that the Earth's rotational axis, which has a tilt of 23 and a half degrees with respect to a perpendicular to the ecliptic plane, doesn't have a constant direction, but it slowly precesses, and it moves its direction in the sky.
This is due to the fact that the Earth is not a perfect sphere, but it has an equatorial bulge, and the gravitational forces, from the Sun and the Moon also, on a non-spherical body, causes this precession.
Now, it means that the X direction of the geocentric-inertial coordinate system and also the heliocentric-inertial coordinate system varies slowly in direction with time going to the west.
It takes 26,000 years for the Earth's rotational axis to go through a full rotation on this cone around the North Pole of the ecliptic plane.
Very slow motion, but it means that we have to specify clearly when we use these inertial coordinate systems which year we are talking about, because the X direction changes slowly with time.
On this slide we have a visual expression of the precession of the Earth's axis on the celestial sphere.
We are now here.
This is the direction of the South Celestial Pole.
It's slowly migrating with respect to the stars in the clockwise direction in the Southern hemisphere.
We'll come back to this point, point 2000, in about 26,000 years from now.
If we look at what happens in the north, we are now here and we see clearly that we have a star very close to the direction of the North Celestial Pole and in this case, we go counterclockwise and the Celestial North Pole will move with respect to the star in 26,000 years, all the way around and will come back to the point on the top.
