I'm Andrea Accomazzo.
I work for the European Space Agency, ESA.
I work as a head of the Planetary and Solar Missions
Operations Division in ESA, and I've been the Rosetta Flight Director.
The Rosetta mission has been one of the master missions in the history of spaceflight.
The target of the Rosetta mission was to approach a comet, land on a comet with the purpose of characterizing it completely from a scientific point of view.
Comets are believed to be the remnants of the formation of the solar system.
And our scientists want to study them to understand better how the solar system formed, how our planet formed, and in the end our life developed as well.
To achieve the objectives of the Rosetta mission, the planning was massive and lasted years and years.
The mission has been one of the most complex missions ever.
First, we wanted to approach a comet.
Comets are orbiting the Sun.
The comets we can approach are orbiting the Sun at distances similar to the ones of Jupiter and the Earth.
So they are relatively faster than the Earth.
So first, we had to reach this comet, not only in distance but also in velocity.
And to do this, it took us ten years to get there.
We continuously had to accelerate the probe through the solar system for ten years, such that when we approached the comet finally in 2014, we had exactly the same velocity.
Only in this way we could really complete a rendezvous maneuver and stay there together with the comet.
Once there, a completely new mission started, begun, and we had to characterize the comet and develop the rest of the mission.
Once we arrived at the comet, then we found a totally different environment.
For ten years, we had been traveling, like on a motorway, very fast with very strong forces and accelerations.
Once we arrived at the comet, the environment was totally different.
Everything was extremely delicate.
First, we didn't know anything about the comet itself.
When we fly to Mars or around the Earth, we know everything of these planets.
So we perfectly know how to place a spacecraft in orbit around these planets.
With the comet it was totally different.
We didn't even know the mass of the comet.
We didn't even know the shape.
Even the orbit of the comet itself was not perfectly known and we wanted to land.
So all these unknowns, these variables, had to be resolved.
So we started characterizing the comet and flying next to the comet very, very slowly, we could measure the mass of the comet.
By looking at the perturbation of the trajectory of Rosetta, we could measure the mass of the comet.
Once we knew the mass of the comet, then we could plan proper orbits, proper trajectory, around the comet.
These accelerations are extremely, extremely small.
Just to give an example, here on the Earth, we are subject to a gravitational acceleration of 1g.
On the surface of the comet, this acceleration is 100,000 times smaller than this.
So if the lander, Philae, weighs
100 kilograms here on the Earth, it's one gram on the surface of the comet.
Around the comet in orbit it's even worse.
Gravitational accelerations are in the order of 10 to the minus 6g,
10 to the minus 7g.
This is far below the microgravity environment that astronauts observe on the Space Station.
On top of this, there are other accelerations acting on Rosetta with the same order of magnitude.
We have the aerodynamic acceleration.
The comet is throwing out gases.
These gases are like wind impinging on the big solar arrays of Rosetta.
These are like sails.
This aerodynamic's acceleration is pushing Rosetta slightly away.
It's the same order of magnitude as the gravitational acceleration.
On top of it, we have the solar radiation pressure.
So the photons emitted by the Sun also impinging on the big surfaces of Rosetta pushing Rosetta away from the Sun, same order of magnitude.
So the orbital problem of Rosetta at the comet is much, much more complex than flying a spacecraft around Mars, around the Earth.
This small acceleration had to be first characterized and then used to plan the trajectory of our spacecraft around the comet.
This was the major challenge of the Rosetta mission.
On top of orbiting the comet to observe it from orbit, we even wanted to land on the surface of the comet.
So this was yet another challenge for the mission.
First, we had to characterize the comet well enough to select a landing site and then in the end, we had to drop our small lander.
Just to give you a feeling, the comet is five kilometers big.
It's like a big mountain in the Alps.
Take the Mont Blanc.
Mont Blanc is five kilometers big.
The day we dropped the lander, we were flying at 22 kilometers altitude with Rosetta.
This is like flying at twice the altitude of a normal airplane.
Then we dropped our lander out of the window of the airplane.
The lander is as big as a washing machine, and this washing machine has been falling alone for 22 kilometers at very, very low velocity.
It took seven hours to go down.
So this is a ballistic flight.
It's just like dropping a stone from an aircraft, and we had to hit a glacier on the Mont Blanc with a very high accuracy.
To give you an idea of the accuracy we had to achieve, if we had committed an error of one centimeter per second in the velocity of Rosetta when releasing Philae before its fall, propagated for seven hours, this one centimeter per second is 250 meters error on the surfacing position and this we couldn't afford.
So we had to maneuver very, very carefully Rosetta.
This was the trick of this operation, such that the moment we released Philae, then Philae would fall according to the trajectory we had planned.
In reconstructing the trajectory of Rosetta a posteriori, we realized that we had a wrong velocity of Rosetta
1.7 millimeters per second and 32 meters in position at the time of release of Philae.
All this done at 500 million kilometers away from the Earth.
Operating Rosetta proposes challenges much higher than any other mission.
The first difficulty is the trajectory itself.
The trajectory of the spacecraft or the orbit, if you prefer, is not stable for a very long time around such a small object with such small acceleration, so similar accelerations.
So what we had to do is continuously plan the trajectory of Rosetta at the comet.
And this we had to do minimum twice a week.
On another spacecraft, like Venus Express around Venus, or Mars Express around Mars, it's much easier.
We plan the trajectory.
The trajectory is stable and predictable for months if not years.
Every now and then, we do correction maneuvers, but we are talking about weeks, months, even longer sometimes.
Rosetta is not the case.
So the first big challenge of operating Rosetta is this continuous maneuvering around the comet.
The second one is the environment itself.
Rosetta flies in a very active environment.
There are winds coming out of the comet because it's emitting gases, this ice that is sublimating and is impinging on the solar arrays, blowing the space away.
And this environment is changing.
The comet is approaching the Sun.
It's getting hotter and hotter.
There are more gases coming out.
There is more dust.
These gases, when they sublimate, they crack the surface of the comet and there is dust particles coming out of the comet itself.
These dust particles are fooling our star tracker.
The star tracker recognizes the star patterns, knows how Rosetta is oriented in space.
But if there are dust particles, then it doesn't know whether these are stars or dust particles.
And when the star tracker doesn't know how Rosetta is oriented, then we cannot communicate with the Earth.
We cannot point the high gain antenna through the Earth, and this is a problem.
So operating Rosetta is a continuous challenge because the comet environment in which we are flying is continuously changing.
And this is a continuous evolution of the mission planning we had to do.
We had to follow exactly the behavior of the comet over time.
Now in summer 2015, we flew through the perihelion of the orbit of the comet.
So it's the closest point of the orbit of the comet to the Sun.
We observed the peak activity of the comet around September 2015.
Now the comet is going away, far away from the Sun.
So what this means is the comet is cooling down again.
So Rosetta can go again closer.
In the past months we had to fly up to 400 kilometers away from the nucleus.
Now we are approaching again the comet.
We are currently below 100 kilometers.
In the course of 2016, we will approach again the comet.
Unfortunately, we will not be able to operate Rosetta beyond September 2016.
So what we'll have to do is to plan the end of mission.
We had several options but the option we have selected is actually to land the spacecraft itself onto the surface of the comet.
Rosetta is not planned to land on the surface of the comet so it will not survive this impact, but we will fly very, very low altitude.
In the last weeks before this touchdown of Rosetta, we plan to fly very, very low orbits.
We think we can safely go below one kilometer altitude from the surface of the comet maybe up to 200 meters.
So we should be able to get spectacular images, and one day we will decide that we will do a final touchdown on the surface of the comet, and this will be the end of this fantastic mission.
I went back to my original role, my current role within the agency, which is the Head of the Solar and Planetary Missions Division.
In this role, I have to take care not only of Rosetta but also other seven missions.
Some of them are in flight, like Mars Express and Cluster.
Some others are in preparation.
We are about to launch ExoMars.
We are preparing BepiColombo to fly to Mercury.
We are preparing Solar Orbiter.
We are preparing JUICE to fly to Jupiter.
So my role is being, sort of, project manager for the preparation of the operations for these missions.
I'm not responsible-- we are not responsible for the design of the spacecraft itself but we are responsible for the design of the mission, of the design of the systems we will use on ground to control the spacecraft, and we are responsible for the design of the operations.
I'm overseeing personally all these projects, so I'm interacting daily with all the single responsible of the project and we are preparing our systems to fly in these new missions in space.
I've been extremely lucky and privileged in having had the chance to work in interplanetary missions, on the Rosetta missions, but the beauty of ESA goes beyond the single project, I personally believe.
ESA offers an environment where you meet people from all over the world.
You work in one of the most fascinating domains that we have.
There are difficulties also working in this environment.
ESA is governed by political bodies.
These political bodies are now more than 20 countries contributing to ESA.
So there's no single country that decides a program and implements it.
It's always a continuous agreement but it's a very democratic process and this I find extremely positive in the world of today.
And this is also reflected in the day-to-day work we do.
We have many nationalities and one thing I've appreciated in all these years spent at ESA is the fact that people come with their feature, with their characteristics.
I'm Italian and we all know the characteristics of Italians.
The beauty of ESA is that all these characteristics come together and only the most positive ones are filtered and maintained.
So you get the best you can get out of such an environment.
This is extremely positive and I think it's a message that we should bring into our society of nowadays where there are many problems of these kinds, so actually we can have a better future.
I personally graduated in aerospace engineering at the Polytechnic of Milano in Italy.
Then I wanted to work in space, absolutely.
I started my career as a design engineer in an Italian company.
Then slowly I got involved in the Rosetta mission.
I got in touch with the operations center of ESA in Germany, in Darmstadt where I currently work.
At a certain stage I was hired as a spacecraft operations engineer for the Rosetta mission.
This is the first time I really actually dealt with space operations but I immediately realized that this was my domain.
This is something that I really liked and I feel born to do, actually, this job.
So this is what I started doing.
I worked a few years for the Rosetta mission.
We came to the launch.
Then I was reassigned as spacecraft operations manager for the Venus Express mission, and after these, an experience of two and a half years, where we launched Venus Express, we did orbit insertion at Venus, we brought the mission into routine operations.
Then I came back to the Rosetta mission as a spacecraft operations manager and I kept this role until shortly before arriving at the comet when I became the flight director for this mission.
