Hello and welcome to today's class, which is intended to help us better understand what the protected area management categories are.
The reference book to consult as a complement to the class is once again the Guidelines for applying protected area management categories developed by the World Commission on Protected Areas.
You can see the publication here.
Let's take this opportunity to listen to Charlotte, who gave us the definition during the previous module and is going to tell us a bit more about this commission that is very important for us and which we will discuss again later.
Visit the website of WCPA which I'm showing you here as you will find a lot of useful material there over the course of this MOOC.
WCPA is the World Commission on Protected Areas.
It is one of the six specialist groups of
IUCN.
It was created in 1958 and today, it is managed by the global program of IUCN on protected areas.
The commission today counts about
1,800 members in 140 countries in the world.
What is interesting is that its mission is to set up, or at least promote, an international representative network of marine and terrestrial protected areas that are managed efficiently.
For Africa, we consider that there are two regions at the level of WCPA.
There is the West and Central African region and of course, the East and Southern African region.
So, I'm going to talk to you mostly about the West and Central African region which counts today about 110 members coming from some 20 countries.
Unfortunately, we have a few countries that are not yet represented.
But what is great is that in this Commission, we have members who come from different categories of stakeholders.
For example, you have directors of protected areas,
You have specialists – practitioners as you say – the protected area managers themselves.
We also have people working in international organizations.
We have people working in NGOs, non-governmental organizations.
We also have other experts who don't necessarily work on protected areas but work on other themes in connection with biodiversity and the protection of nature.
So, it's a really dynamic and inclusive network that seeks to gather all of the expertise that we have at the regional level in terms of protected areas management.
In order to become a member of the World Commission on Protected Areas, you must be ready to take an active part and contribute to the Commission's mission voluntarily.
So, it's really volunteer work.
To become a member, there are two steps.
First, you must complete an online form.
It is a form you can find on the IUCN website.
The applicant will complete this form and provide information on his interests, his expertise and also the way he wishes to contribute to the different components of the Commission.
Next, he or she must send a resume to the IUCN Secretariat which deals with members.
Then, the resume together with the form will be analyzed by the management of the Commission at the level of
West and Central Africa.
Finally, the person will receive a response from the Secretariat confirming or not whether he is officially a member of the Commission and he will receive at the same time information on what is expected from a Commission member and all the advantages you may enjoy as a
WCPA member.
In the previous module, we have learned to identify what a protected area is, according to the definition that I remind you here.
Working on the categories means first inquiring about the nature of the territory as these categories only interest us if the territory is indeed a protected area.
So, the first step is always asking yourself whether it is indeed a space which main objective is the conservation of nature.
It is essential.
So, what is the use of these categories?
As we're going to see, they have several possible uses but the main one is simply to make it possible to classify the different protected areas into rather homogeneous boxes based on their common characteristics.
Let's take a simple example.
Imagine that one day, you develop a cataract.
You then go to your local clinic to see your usual ophthalmologist.
But once at the clinic, his secretary tells you that he's gone on holiday and will not be back for another month.
But she has an idea and suggests that you get an operation from his obstetrician colleague who, granted, has never performed surgery on an eye but is always up for a new experience.
In addition, he's very dexterous since before becoming a surgeon, he was a lumberjack.
What are you going to do?
Are you going to entrust your eyes to this enthusiastic experimenter?
Are you going to look for another ophthalmologist?
Well, the same holds for protected areas as for clinics.
They all look alike but they don't all have the same role, the same objective or the same management.
So, classifying the more than 200,000 protected areas of the planet in different categories, as described on this graph that shows the surface covered, will help us better identify them, work more specifically on each of them and develop tools that are better adapted to their management or governance style, according to the different categories that you see here.
Even if many believe that to be a park custodian is like being the custodian of any park, that is not true and there are actually different jobs, different profiles, different responsibilities according to the different protected area categories.
Being able to distinguish sites according to their main management objective is therefore the central function of these categories.
Now, let's have a look at other possible uses.
By identifying different protected area categories, you are able to know whether the network that you manage includes precisely all the possible methods of management or whether it is monospecific, which may suggest that it is incomplete.
On this map for example, we can see the network of the Ivorian Office of Parks and Reserves, which includes 14 parks.
You see them here in hatched but all these parks belong to only two categories: category 1 and 2.
Why exclude other management methods?
Another similar function relates to governance.
Even though categories refer to the management objective of a site, it is often directly or indirectly related to who will manage the territory.
Having different management categories is a good way to expand the list of the various stakeholders that you will involve in the network.
For example, by creating around the Pendjari national park - that you see here - various protected areas of other categories
(hunting, villages, etc... another hunting area here), other areas that are protected areas but of other categories, the co-management with other stakeholders
(for example the populations or the hunting concessions), may take place while it would be difficult if you took into consideration only the park itself.
Another very important function is to be able to better organize the collection and analysis of data from the parks.
Since data is better collected when targeting specific categories, they are easier to read and to compare between sites.
Similarly, comparative park evaluations should only concern sites of the same category, at the risk of comparing mangoes with bananas an additional good reason to classify our protected areas into boxes that make sense.
Other functions are appearing all over the place.
They are interesting to take into account for the future in Africa.
In particular, you may create one regulation for each category and then simply make a list of parks by category.
In this way, instead of having a usually unreadable text, like this text on the Mount Nimba dating from or even a lost text, you only have to manage a list of sites for which everyone can easily check what is authorized or not according to its category.
This leads to more clarity, more transparency and brings us back to the idea that the staff of a park should not move from one site to another at the whim of transfers but instead actually go where their skills are the most needed.
So, categories simply aim at improving the management and organization of protected areas by classifying them better.
And if somewhere, the use of these categories leads to the opposite result, it is simply that they are being used badly.
In particular, you can't decide to change the category of a park in order to limit its uses or evict its inhabitants who had the right to live there until then.
You don't assign a category to a park to decrease its level of protection.
None of this is the proper use of these categories.
To sum up, categories are simply a tool to assist the planning of protected areas.
They are related to the management objective of the territory, which is given to us by the classification text for a traditional site or the decision of the authority in charge since - it may be an oral tradition in the case of a sacred site for example.
So, you must refer to the objective in order to determine the management category.
We've reached the end of this class.
The next episode will focus on the categories themselves.
Have a great day!
