Welcome back to part two of this chapter.
We shall continue the discussion of Chapter One by showing the historical picture of the spectrum of ethanol recorded in 1951.
Different isotopes may have different spins.
First of all, there are quite a few isotopes, such as the ubiquitous carbon-13, which is found in all organic matter.
Oxygen-16, also all over the place, has no spin at all, although it has a charged nucleus, of course.
And the nucleus may well be spinning around.
Why should it not?
Yet it does not have a spin and so the magnetic quantum number can only be zero and there are no transitions.
One cannot do any NMR at all.
There are a series of important nuclei that have a spin one-half and that are actually very popular in NMR spectroscopy and MRI imaging.
Some nuclei, some isotopes have a spin quantum number equal to one, mostly deuterium, nitrogen-14, and lithium-6.
Some of them have a quantum number I of three-halves.
Typical examples are boron-11, sodium-23, chlorine-35 and chlorine-37.
By the way, sodium can be nicely observed in NMR.
And then some have the spin five-halves, such as oxygen-17 and aluminum-27 which is actually very interesting to observe in aluminosilicates.
Finally, some have a spin three.
And there are some exotic examples that go beyond.
Not only do they have spin, but they have different gammas, i.e., different gyromagnetic ratios.
The gyromagnetic ratio is an inherent property of different isotopes
The different gammas have been given using proper units of inverse teslas and inverse seconds.
That means that if you multiply them with 9.4 tesla, the proton NMR frequency appears at 400 MHz, and the deuterium NMR frequency at about 61 MHz, and carbon-13 near 100 MHz.
You should remember that there is a factor of about one-quarter here and you might also wish to remember that there is a factor of about one-tenth between the proton and nitrogen-15 frequencies.
These frequencies have been given for a field of 9.4 tesla because that is very common in the current world of chemistry and physics.
There are many, many spectrometers that operate at 400 MHz because that is reasonably cheap and yet very effective.
We also see that the natural abundance of these isotopes varies a great deal.
For example, deuterium is only found in 0.015% of ordinary sea or rain water.
So that's not very much and you may wish to enrich it if you want to observe deuterium.
Carbon-13 is about 1% abundant.
It can be observed directly but, of course, you can boost it by enhancing the population differences or by labelling the molecules with carbon-13.
Nitrogen-14 has nearly 100 % abundance but is very difficult to observe because it has a very large quadrupole splitting.
As you can see, nitrogen-14 has a spin I = 1.
And this is one of the isotopes we have worked on in Lausanne over the last few years.
Nitrogen-15 is very popular in biomolecules because you can enhance it synthetically by cloning techniques in proteins but it is still challenging.
Fluorine-19 is very popular because it has a very high abundance,
100%, and also because one can find fluorine-19 in many drug molecules but not in natural living matter.
Silicone-29 is popular for those studying silicates and aluminosilicates.
And phosphorus is very popular in biochemistry because there are many important phosphates in living organisms.
So you see, every isotope has a characteristic spin quantum number.
Now, there are some rules about these quantum numbers.
For example, if the number of protons and the number of neutrons are both even, then the resulting spin quantum number is zero.
That is the case for carbon-12 and oxygen-16.
But you can also have cases where both protons and neutrons appear in odd numbers.
Then we have integer quantum numbers, such as one, two or three.
They can be even and odd or odd and even and in either case, we have so called half-integer spins.
Actually, these rules are not particularly useful.
It is better to look at the full table.
The electromagnetic spectrum is very wide.
It ranges from very high frequencies and very short wave lengths to very low frequencies and very long wave lengths.
In spectroscopy, gamma rays are used in Mössbauer spectroscopy that uses very high energies, higher than x-rays, which in turn are more energetic than ultra-violet and visible light.
Next we have the infra-red range and below that the microwave range and, much lower, we have the radio-frequency range.
This has several consequences.
First of all, radio-frequency fields are largely innocuous.
Nobody really worries that when you listen to a radio that you might get irradiated by the transmitters or by the receivers. Indeed, radio-frequency irradiation is quite innocuous, which has great advantages for MRI.
Radio-frequencies also can penetrate through all sorts of tissues including living humans.
Again, you can check with your radio that it works even if you lie on top of it, and that is one reason why MRI is so popular.
Whereas imaging opaque humans with visible light is, of course, very difficult.
NMR has other advantages because we have a great spread of frequencies.
On a scale where 400 MHz corresponds to NMR of protons, you see that fluorine-19 appears in the vicinity.
Phosphorous-31 is somewhat below and then the ubiquitous carbon-13 appears at about 100 MHz.
But if we have a high-resolution spectrometer that can resolve different chemical shifts, then one can distinguish various types of protons.
So for example, at the top end we have aldehyde protons, at the bottom end, aliphatic protons.
Zero ppm actually corresponds by convention to tetramethylsilane (TMS).
This range spans about 4 kHz out of 400 MHz which corresponds to 10 ppm, and indeed that is the common scale used here.
So the frequencies of NMR transitions are typically in the range between 10 and 1,000 MHz.
Incidentally, the world's most powerful machine has indeed 1,000 MHz for protons.
You can visit it in Lyon in France.
We shall consider a nucleus with a magnetic moment µ,
This magnetic moment is immersed in a magnetic field.
We can orient this magnetic field so that it's parallel to the z-axis or if you prefer, we can simply align the z-axis of our coordinate system with the field.
In that case, all we have to worry about is the product of the z component of the magnetic moment and the amplitude of the field.
It turns out that this z component is determined by the product of m, the magnetic quantum number, h-bar, Planck’s constant divided by 2 pi, gamma, the gyromagnetic ratio, and the amplitude of the field.
Remember that m can be plus or minus one-half.
If I is equal to one-half, m is either plus or minus one half.
The splitting in energy is simply h-bar times the absolute value of gamma times B.
And the NMR frequency is the same as the splitting divided by h, and divided by two pi.
Now for a spin one-half, we have either m equal plus one-half and we call this the alpha level, or we have m equal minus one-half and we call this the beta level and we have a single transition.
So this is the case for a spin one-half.
But if we have a spin one, such as for deuterium or for nitrogen-14, then we have three possibilities.
We have m = either minus one, or zero, or plus one, and indeed we have three different levels.
It turns out that the obvious nomenclature alpha, beta, gamma is not common in our business, so we just use these quantum numbers.
If a nucleus with I = 1, which could be a deuterium or a nitrogen-14, is dissolved in an isotropic liquid, then it turns out that the energy splitting between the top and middle levels is exactly the same as the energy splitting between the middle and bottom levels.
So these two transitions are degenerate.
When we see a single line like this, actually half of it comes from the top transition and half from the bottom transition.
Whereas in this case, for protons, for example, there is really only one transition.
So let's attempt to summarize the main points of the introductory chapter.
First of all, every isotope in the periodic table has a characteristic spin quantum number I.
Some isotopes have I = 0, in which case it is just impossible to do NMR.
This is the case for carbon-12 and the only way to rescue the situation is by replacing carbon-12 nucleus by a carbon-13.
Every isotope with I different from zero has a characteristic magnetic moment µ.
Nuclear spins have 2I + 1 distinct energy levels labelled by magnetic quantum numbers m, which can vary from minus I to plus I, in steps of one.
In a magnetic field, the energy levels are split by an amount that is proportional to the size of the nuclear magnetic moment and to the strength of the magnetic field.
NMR spectroscopy uses electromagnetic radiation to induce transitions between energy levels.
The frequencies of NMR transitions are typically in the range between 10 and 1,000 MHz.
The intensities of NMR signals depend on the differences of the populations of the energy levels.
These populations are determined by Boltzmann’s law, thus by the temperature, by the field and by the gyromagnetic ratio and all of these parameters conspire to make NMR a rather insensitive technique.  This is in fact Achilles’ heel of NMR.
One often needs very concentrated samples or very long experimental times to get decent signals and sufficient information.
And this is one of the reasons why so many NMR spectroscopists are trying to improve the methods.
Thank you.
