Hello my name is Francois Ave and I will show you in this MOOC, the different information you can get using scanning electron microscopy characterization of the microstructure of semanticist material.
We first need to understand how a microscope works and what happens when electrons are sent to assemble and heat the surface of the material.
So the first question we could ask is Why do we use electrons rather than visible light.
The first approach for observing the macro structure is to use an optical microscope, using light as the source of emissions. However the resurrection of light microscope is limited by the wavelength of visible light between 400 to 800 nanometers. The wavelength of electrons is actually much smaller around 1 to 10 Pico meters. It is to observe much smaller objects and to get a much better resolution in the case of electron microscopy the resolution is actually not limited by the wavelength of electrons but by the aberrations inside of microscope which are kinds of physical deviations caused by the microscope lenses. The most common type of microscopy to observe the microstructure of semanticist materials is the scanning electron microscope which is actually more accessible and easier to use when transmission electron microscopic in a scanning electron microscope, electrons are emitted from the different source the best for a series of lenses which focus them and then the electrons reach the surface of the sample.
And they go a series of elastic inelastic collisions with the atoms of the simple, different signals can be collected from these collisions. When we talk about the scanning electron microscope it means that actually the face of a simple would be analyze point by point and the final image is actually the assemblage of the information from all this point.
An insolent electron as you can see here, faces a series of interactions before its energy is fully dissipated. Thus all these interactions from this incident electron and the elections of the sample does not occur exactly the entering point of the electrons but occur in a more global volume which is called the interaction volume these interactions can be either elastic we've no energy loss or
Inelastic, the first kind of interaction which can occur between the electron and the atoms of a simple is if an incident electron, as one here, collides with an electron
Of the atom of the sample, from this collision the incident electron deviated like this, and bound electron is ejected this ejected electron is called a secondary electron or also called SE the energy of the secondary electrons is typically lower than 50 electon volt which is actually very small, verse if electrons want to be collected by a detector. They have to be formed very close to the samples surface even deeper in a sample then electrons would face some interaction before reaching a simple surface that would be absorbed in the sample due to very low energy and they would not be collected by a secondary electron detector.
So verse the contrast we can obtain will be secondary electrons is a typography contrast as you can see here. Here is shown three points where incident electrons are sent and you can see that actually this volume here is a volume where secondary direction can escape and then be then detected. And you can see that at the edges more electrons can escape the surface. And this verse can be collected.
This means that on the image on these specific points we get more signal and we have a brighter contrast.
This is called the edge effect. Another kind of interaction which can occur is when an incident electron feels the Coolum interactions with a nucleus of an atom of assemble this incident electron is deviated because of this Coolum interaction.
If this division leads to higher angle diffusion, then the electron can leave the surface and it can be collected by the backscattered electron detector. So this electrons which is scattered back is called backscatter the electrons or BSE this interaction is almost elastic. There is almost no energy transfer which means that the energy of the back scattered electrons is very similar to the energy of the incident beam, so which information can be obtained with backscatter electrons?
Well, the Coolum false, we have a nucleus increases with the atomic number that, indeed with increase of the atomic
Number, the number of positive charges of the atom increases, thus the incidence electron has a higher likelihood to be deviated if more electrons are deviated more will also be collected, thus the contrast will be brighter at the image for a higher set of the atom. This graph here shows you that brightness increases with the atomic number which is even best character coefficient which is related to the intensity of the signal as a function of the atomic number and you can see that if you have a material with a higher average said inside, then you see that actually you will see something brighter on your image because you will collect more backscatter electrons.
The third kind of interaction which is very useful for the characterization of a microstructure of semanticist materials is the formation of characteristic X-rays after the ignition of a secondary electron shown here.
An electron is missing in the layer of the atom. This atom is ionized.
If this missing electron originates from an inner electron shell of the atom this atom is energetically unstable. In order to reach a more favorable energetic level, energy form falls from an outer shell with a higher energy to fill the vacancy, these release of energy during this relaxation phenomenon leads to the formation of an X-ray.
And what is important is that the energy of the X-ray is related to the energy difference of the two shell levels here.
Thus the energy of these x rays is characteristic of the atom they come
From. Every element these x rays come from can first be identify and the atom content can be quantified for a selected spot of microstructure. This image shows you how the chamber of a microscope looks like. So you have here the end of a column, So this is the incident beam coming here, leading from the hall to the
Chamber. So the sample holder is right below here. So you sent elections to the sample you will have all these interactions which will be corrected by different defectors
We have here the secondary electron defector which is green on top the Golden plate here is this BSC detector and the EDA detector is that it is right at the back of it hidden. So we can collect all of its information in one microscope. These three types of interactions are very useful to characterize the microstructure of semanticist materials, even next session you will see how to set a nice image and some applications of these three types of interactions for semanticist materials. The first application for secondary electrons is the study of the mythology of particles. You can see here. You have two very nice images showing you of a mythology here of killing night  particles to an anhydrous material. And here for the growth of CSH. So we choose hydration product at a very early age of hydration.
These secondary entrance are used because of its topography contrast which permit to really see
Nicely the morphology of a particles. This analysis is only qualitative. We can't get any quantitative analysis from this study. But still.
It permit to really have a look the different mythologies we can find in some indigenous materials. So after talking about.
Secondary electrons, we can now focus on backscatter electrons.
To do so, It's always better to prepare
Simple as a polished cross-section. As you saw before in the Sample preparation, of course.
So the sample is put in a sample holder like this we just Clip it.
And then we will install it Inside a microscope. So the chamber of a microscope is always in the vacuum to avoid any contamination.
And first vacuum was broken using nitrogen gas. And then the sample is gently put on the sample stage. We use a small giraffe, just check the height of a simple to make sure that we're not too far from the good focus and then we close the chamber and we apply a vacuum again. So now the sample is inside of a microscope and we just waited for a good vacuum to be done to make sure that we won't have any contamination. Moreover it's very important to have a good vacuum otherwise the electrons which are sent to a sample could interact with air molecules inside of a chamber. So it's very important to remove as much as possible air molecule present inside the chamber. When the vacuum is good enough we can start applying a voltage which will lead to an emission of a current, emission of electrons sent to a simple you just click HV here, And we will see an image appearing on the screen. We start collecting
Backscattered electrons and this is the contrast. You can see there. We have some really great
Contrast showing the backscattered electrons collected and
So the different phases we've seen some semanticist material. As you can see the image is a big blur.
Because we're not exactly in focus. So first we need to set the focus to make sure that we have the best resolution possible. So to change our focus. We
Simply adjust the z position of the stage to make sure that the symbol is a good height, and the working distance. So we can see here the typical microstructure of a plane Portland cement sample for which the hydration was stopped at 20 days, so different areas can be clearly distinguished. We can first observe bright gray areas.
These bright areas correspond to anhydrous Clinker grains between these anhydrous grains a metrics of hydration products fills the space, fill with porosity with time so in these bright grains we can clearly identify (12:29) with this angular shape of grains which can also see that for some grains we have not only one great contrast but civil at the same time which means that actually Clinker grains are polyphased and not all monophased so I put on this screen some faces which are likely to be
There, with b c you cannot directly know what is what. But we can demonstrate it we can prove it later.
Doing and EDX on these phases. Concerning the hydration products you can first easily identify bottom diets or calcium hydroxide or C.H. Is this kind of uniform microstructure you can see here. Uniform Greeneville which is actually brighter than the other hydrate, otherwise the main phase filling the rest of porosity is this CSH phase as you can see everywhere we can see either outer CSH.
Also inners CSH which grew inside the initial boundary of clinker grains
Intricate can also be absurd.
This kind of needles Yeah.
And the rest which is black is the porosity which is dark is the porosity. Why is the porosity dark? simply because we are sending electrons to response and we do not collect anything back which is why the contrast is darkening this. another question we could ask is why is the contrast of anhydrous phases brighter? because hydrated phases contain water.
Which significantly decreased the average age coefficient of the phrase.
Or less dense which makes them look darker on the image. So we can have a look at plane PC systems but also that means the rest of using it seems to look at over type of balance. Here is an example of limestone calcined clay cement or LC3 at one day of hydration.
In this system the clay used is not a pure calcined clay of pure matter counting but it's a clay with only 50 percent of of kaolinite calcined inside. So the microstructure shows some differences. Compared to the plane cement of 74.
First we can observe limestone particles here, here, here, also there. We've got a regular shape with a small rim of
CSH green and the surface.
In LC3 in limestone calcined clay cement.
Also of course observe calcined clay particles. And what you can see with these
Calcined clay particles like here, here, here, also there, there also is that the grille all is not uniform everywhere.
Why so it means that we have actually impurities in calcined clay, as I said before this clay here contains only 50 percent of gelignite which means that the rest is impurities. For instance this particle here on the top of this image shows a much brighter area on the right side.
And this indicates that there is likely to have elements with higher atomic number or higher Z  in this area which is likely to be actually a narrow any impurity in the calcined clay so we have best scattered electron imaging we can have very nice information on the repetition of the phases in the microstructure. But for the identification of phases we do not have any evidence, any clinical evidence of a phases.
Let just try now to carry out immediate analysis on this macro structure to identify several phases that we assumed to be present before on this video is shown the quantification of A-light phase we spots several points of
A-light in these grain here and we're going to start.
With the EDX analysis to get the chemical composition of a phase as you can see the quantification is very fast. And now we can have a look at the results for EDX there are some tricks to be aware of. First it is impossible to quantify hydrogen as we saw before. To form an X-ray we need to have an negatron fall from an upper player of the atom, for hydrogen is impossible because there is only one electron. So we cannot quantify hydrogen.
EDX another thing is that the quantification of oxygen and other light elements is not extremely reliable.
Because of the extremely low energy you need to ionized oxygen and the other light elements. So it's not very accurate. Thus it is better actually to use atomic ratios from the chemical analyzes than direct values collected on the software.
For instance fossil ferrous here instead of looking at the absolute value of things we can have a look at the calcium to silicon ratio. We know that in a light we should have calcium  to silicon ratio close to three not to make calcium to silicon ratio close to three which is the case here. So this evidence is the presence of C3S in this grain we can do so for all of the other phases and hydrous or hydrates to evidence their presence in the microstructure.
The main issue for EDX analyzes is the interaction volume we talked about at the beginning of this talk
When a specifics sport is pointed actually the information which we collect does not come from this point only but comes from the interaction volume related to this point which is a few microns. Right.
So if we are pointing just at the border between two phases it is very likely to have information from both phase.
This is an issue of a determination of a C(-A)-S-H composition so CSH and C(-A)-S-H are roughly the same thing. It's just that when very the significant incorporation of aluminum in this CSH we call it a C(-A)-S-H, in the case of LC3
For instance we call it C(-A)-S-H. So when we point the CSH
Here, it is extremely likely to have information on other phases at the same time. Thus the idea to get an accurate composition of a CSH is to use
2D scatter plots to deal with intermixing problem.
How does it work? The best way of doing it is to plot's the aluminum to calcium ratio here, the atomic composition aluminum to calcium ratio as a function of a
Silicon to Calcium ratio. Why do we do that?
Because the intermixing which can occur with Portlandite or calcium hydroxide can be directly observed. These phases I just mention are present on the left axes here because they didn't contain any silicon this way we can isolate the points which are really CSH from points which are coming with a bit of information of these pure phases here. But on that engaging in and if you do that. So this is for a new PC system at 20 days of hydration and 93 system of 20 day of hydration.
We can collect approximately 200 points per system and we get these kind of clouds of data so if we have to look closer to the PC system for instance we have a cloud of data around this composition here. And we have some point deviating and going for instance here towards spot on that if we take for instance this point here which is roughly in the middle between CH and this cloud of
SH it means that for this point we have information approximately about half of from C.H. from part on that and the from this CSH.
Now how to find the exact CSH composition you have a cloud of data here. The more you are on the left side of his cloud the more you are in damage with other phases which means that's the rights correct CCH composition is at the right age of a cloud.
So you can use these tine lines from Compton from these phases we've fixed stricken metrical composition to help you to find the re-composition the intersection of these lines from pothlandite, atrogite and A.F.M phases should give you a very good CSH composition and what you can see when you can apply it to different systems which is the case here.
So we have OPC and this is the system and what we can see is that we have really strong differences in terms of CSH composition within the system. We have a strong silicon and aluminum incorporation in the CSH. This is a kind of valuable information you can get from EDX analysis another thing which you can do with EDX which is more global I'd say is to get a phase distribution not only on some points but on the whole map in your system which is an example is shown here for an OPC system.
So you simply select the elements you want aluminum, silicon, calcium, magnesium,
Iron, oxygen, potassium, sodium, sulfur and you can actually acquire and ADX but not on a couple of points but on each point of your map so of course this takes more time.
But this also gives us some valuable indication on the phase distribution inside your microstructure. So that's a very nice example of how we can use microscope for semanticist materials.
There are many other applications which can be studied with a scanning electron microscope for instance we serve a porosity scan of dark area and the microstructure
This porosity which is of course a kind of curve porosity like Kosovan approximately one micron can be quantified using image analyzes and we can get a rough estimation on the porosity of a system the size distribution of particles can also be determined. It's qualitative busted. It can be. It can give us an idea about the distribution of of a particle size. Another thing we can do with them is to look at the Grealy whole sense of know see what you can see here that is just microstructure for instance with temperature we can see that we know that the density of its porosity changes and depending on the agreeable intensity we can't celebrate it and know how much it changes with temperature. Finally mapping can also be very useful to characterize the damage. For instance or actually see care reaction.
It is extremely useful to follow the direction of a song and to know where the damage is and what really happens then we to better understand mechanisms of these interactions. To sum up what is so stunning electron microscopy is one of the most powerful technique for a study of semanticist materials. We can do really many different things with scanning electron microscope from Topographic imaging to
Basket electron imaging from chemical analysis. And there are really many applications for which scanning electron microscope pretty pennies to better understand what's going on in a semanticist is material.
Thank you for watching.
