Hello everyone, and welcome to the introductory lecture of our MOOC on designing a smart specialization strategy.
My name is Andrea and I'm a project manager at Bak Basel economics.
And I'm also one of the teaching assistants of this MOOC.
We are very excited to be able to offer this online course, since we believe this approach has great potential to assist you, policy makers, experts, as well as public agencies, in structuring their policy and development programs.
This course will equip you with the most fundamental methods and techniques to design a smart specialization strategy for your region.
This introductory video will give you a general overview, as well as an idea on how the course is organized, and what you can expect from us.
Also, I would like to point out what we expect from you.
I presume the information on this slide is not much news to you.
This MOOC is led by Professor Dominique Foray
And Martin Eichler, both experts in the field of smart specialization strategies.
Dominique, who co-authored the concept during his time in the knowledge of growth expert group In the European commission.
And Martin in turn, who engages himself in regional benchmarking as chief economist at Bak Basel economics since many years.
Teaching assistants are Camille and me.
If you have questions or suggestions regarding the course, please just drop Camille or me an email to the following email addresses.
Let's have a quick look at the general objectives of the course.
During the course we will propose not only a systematic approach to understand the Smart Specialization concept, but we will also explain how to apply it, in concrete terms, through case studies.
And we will identify the different stages necessary for the designing of a Smart Specialization
Strategy.
In addition, we will present the analytical tools, methods, and data that permit the development of a knowledge base, essential for the implementation of this strategy.
What you see here is the basic structure of our MOOC.
We put a lot of effort in this because we believe that the application of the presented methods and tools is crucial.
We base our tools on of course the lectures, the storyboards, and the recommended reading.
Also, since we consider you experts in the field of smart specialization strategies, we would like to get as interactive as possible in the next five weeks. therefore, we offer a wide range of different learning activities, in which you can express yourself.
We prepared a storyboard for each week.
It not only describes what will happen during this week but also sums up the most important learning objectives of the respective week.
It also includes the bibliography of the week, as well as the topic of the peer reviewed assignment.
Now let's discuss the learning activities proposed in our course.
As I already mentioned before, we consider you experts in the field of smart specialization strategies, or regional economic development in general.
We do not only want to teach the concept, but also would like to give you the opportunity to share your experience in order for us to, together with you, learn from it.
Your expertise is part of our teaching material.
We therefore offer several channels in order to make our online course as interactive as possible.
In order to test yourself with respect to the required knowledge, after every module, you will solve a quiz in the form of multiple choice questions.
We would like you to think outside of the box and reflect on what you've learned.
For this reason we will have special forums, where we will start an interactive discussion on a specific topic related to this content.
Note that there will always be a general forum for each module where you can ask questions, or share your thoughts and suggestions with us and your peers.
Furthermore we will have formative assessments, and a graded assignment reviewed by your peers at the end of every week.
The purpose of the formative assessment is to prepare you perfectly for the final assignment at the end of the five weeks.
It will give you the opportunity to reflect on your knowledge and update it along with the course, and therefore learn in a very effective way.
All those channels of learning activities, together with the peer-reviewed assignment, will enable you, together with us, to take very much advantage of this MOOC and interact with each other as much as possible.
Our goal of this course is not only to teach the concept, and its implications, but also to learn about your experiences, and practical knowledge, since your expertise matters a lot for this MOOC to fulfill its purpose.
And therefore, we are very much looking forward to the following five weeks that we will spend with you.
We very much hope that you will enjoy it as much as we do, and did, during the production of this course.
Thank you for your attention and see you soon.
