Specialization.
The big word is out.
It is also a bit of a rude word too, even if we have just seen that specialization is a source of efficiency in the field of knowledge and innovation production, and also in the field of the government action.
But this word can also mean standardization, monoculture, impoverishment of the potential of evolution.
The big question is : if we need to specialize, on what should we do so?
How to make choices?
When should we start this process?
Let's start with "On what should we specialize?"
Does that mean choosing two sectors among the five or six that count in the region, according to their relative importance, and give it all for these two sectors?
But in this case we drag the region in an impoverishment logic,
A logic of shrinkening the knowledge base
Why neglect the other sectors?
This is a question that can be asked.
The spirit of smart specialization, its philosophy is that this concentration of resources on critical areas is an opportunity to transform.
Smart specialization is therefore not done at sector level but it focuses on ways to transform these sectors or create new ones.
A track is identified to transform a sector and we concentrate resources, not on the sector itself, but on this path, this track of innovation and on the actors and capacities involved in this transformation.
We can call this track "transformative activity" or "new specialty".
This activity does not concern an entire sector but the part that is mobilized for this.
I will take the example of Galicia, in northwestern
Spain.
A region which is not among the most developed in Europe.
It is classified in the group of moderate innovators.
In Galicia, there are many things.
There is tourism.
There are maritime resources.
There is a large university campus dedicated to the sea.
There are also a large number of automotive sector companies, important food and energy activities.
What could Galicia develop as transformative activities, as smart specializations?
I discussed with my colleagues of the University of Saint-Jacques,
Carmela Sanchez Carreira in particular, and we thought that it would be nice if we could, for example, promote the development of the application of biotechnologies to improve the productivity and quality of fishing activities and canning factories.
It would be good too if we could better integrate information and communication technologies in the touristic offer for the development of digital cultural products.
Or, develop applications of information technology for the food industry to improve the quality of local products.
In all these cases, we see that a smart specialization emerges through the integration of knowledge from regional capacities to transform existing sectors.
Sometimes certain required skills are lacking.
They must therefore come from outside.
We will have to get them.
This is for example the case of the development of new components for the car industry and the companies that will be part, which requires the cooperation of major contractors located in other regions, as well as consulting services from a famous University, the MIT.
So, the food industry in Galicia or the car industry are not smart specializations just because it is important.
However, the exploration and discovery of the potential of information technologies to modernize certain parts of the food industry, or the mobilization of small and medium sized automotive sector companies for the development of new products, can become smart specializations.
In all these cases the sector does not constitute a smart specialization but the activity of transforming it can become one.
Most often, these innovation tracks, these activities, are connected to existing structures and aim to transform them.
It consist in entrusting the smart specialization strategy these modernization or diversification objectives, for the existing industrial structures.
We speak of related varieties and we will come back to this concept next week.
We can also have more rarely the exploration of a new area from almost nothing.
That is what we will call a radical creation.
The strategy does not describe an inanimate structure of the best industrial branches.
This is not a shop window where we want to place the most beautiful things in the area, but it expresses a process and reflects the ability of a region to generate new activities or specialties to transform structures.
This is the strategy!
It is all of these transforming activities which have been selected and on which we will concentrate resources.
And at some point in time, the strategy does not necessarily express all the potential of the region, all of its strengths, its objectives, but it reflects what at that time is the bearer of concrete promises for structural change.
Let's now talk about the "how".
We have observed that specialization was not sectoral but it is at the level of transforming modes of these sectors.
By definition, these ways of transforming sectors these tracks of innovation are not known in advance and they can not be decreed by the Government.
They will have to be discovered by the actors of the innovation.
We will speak of entrepreneurial discovery.
It is a question of interaction between the
Government and the actors of the innovation.
The Government does not decree the new specialties to develop.
It has no ex-ante knowledge to do so.
It will base its decisions on what this process of entrepreneurial discovery will reveal.
We will dedicate the next video to describe this process of entrepreneurial discovery.
Finally, last question,
When ?
When should we start a strategy?
Nothing is fixed in a smart specialization strategy.
It is a living document where new priorities can always be added or withdrawn, according to new opportunities and what we learn constantly from the entrepreneurial discovery process.
This flexibility is the logical consequence of a changing world in which potentials and opportunities change constantly.
The answer to the question "When?", is "all the time".
We have briefly looked at the vast question of "how to specialize"?
On what should we do it?
How to choose ? When to start?
At the heart of smart specialization strategy, there is the constant discovery of these strategic areas which represent opportunities or ways to transform and in which we will therefore concentrate resources, form specific capabilities and generate a critical mass of actors and activities.
You have understood that the discovery of these priorities and actions to undertake is the central point.
We will talk about it a bit more in a final video.
