Hello ! In this module, we want to achieve a feat, almost say all in three short videos on smart specialization strategies so that from the start, we can share a minimum of common notions and convictions, to detach from some beliefs and therefore to adhere to some principles that describe the essence of these strategies.
Let me start with an example : the Oulu region in Finland.
A region specialized in the exploitation of natural resources and mechanical engineering in the 50s and 60s.
In 1960, Nokia installed a cable factory.
Here is the industrial structure, simplified of course, in that region at that time.
From there and thanks to the commitment of the local University and the famous VTT Research Institute and also thanks to regional policies, a high-tech activity develops in development and production of mobile and wireless communication system.
This business develops and grows to the point of transforming the economic structures.
We now speak of Oulu as the Silicon Valley of the North.
The concentration of resources and the integration of different actors helped transform the structures.
Nokia has played a vital role, but also part of the local industry, the University, the research centre, the public agency.
However, from 2008,
Nokia stops playing the leading role because its new strategy favours the relocation of R-D capacities.
Given the risk of decline, new activities emerge from the Silicon Valley of the North to lead up to the development of green information technologies whose applications are found naturally in the mining sector which experienced a revival in the 2000s.
We see how, in each period, the economic structure has changed, through building of new capacities in new strategic areas.
Capacity in information technology then in clean technology.
We are at the heart of a smart specialization strategy even though the concept was not used at the time.
The Oulu region gradually discovers its potential and opportunities.
Strategic areas are identified and we specialize according to these potentials and these opportunities to transform the structures.
Structural change is an essential perspective, it is the opposite of rigid and mired structures in ancient productive modes which do not allow businesses to be competitive or to create modern and attractive jobs that young graduates look for.
We will see in the next module that the structural change can occur spontaneously thanks to the initiative of companies and their capacity for collective action.
It works in some cases, especially in the most advanced regions.
But in most cases it does not work.
The smart specialization strategy offers to create the conditions and to set up a process to mobilize the actors of innovation, to embark them in collective action to develop these new specialties which will allow the evolution of structures, transforming some sectors, diversify the economy, establishing new ones according to a certain vision of the future.
Develop oneself new specialties that will transform its economy, it is the motto of the smart specialization strategy.
They are not necessarily new tools, new instruments, it is rather a new "mindset" characterized by an additional intentionality and action to establish priorities and to facilitate coordination for the development of new specialties.
It is a new approach of the innovation policy which requires new knowledge new information on the region's economy, its potential and opportunities.
In this module, we will talk about the four basic elements of a smart specialization strategy which refers to the question of "why, what, how and when".
Let's start with the "why".
There are actually two reasons that come together to justify or motivate a specialization process in the field of research and innovation.
First, when we look at what determines productivity and the effectiveness of research and innovation activities, the logics of scale and spatial agglomeration economies are still there.
There are important indivisibilities in the field of R & D and innovation, particularly in terms of a territory.
This means that research and development and innovation require many services, infrastructures and skills whose availability is possible only if enough activities are undertaken.
And then there is the constraint of spatial agglomeration.
The innovation remains highly dependent on the interactions between people, informal communication, whether they are planned and repeated meetings or accidental and surprising encounters.
The greater the agglomeration of people, researchers, businesses, the more the interactions and communications.
With these indivisibilities and these agglomeration effects, the concept of critical mass becomes essential.
But a medium sized area can not generate critical masses everywhere.
Admittedly, a region can be tempted to do a little bit of everything but this is not enough. Besides, when we do a bit of everything, we try to do more or less like everyone else, because we are not specialized in a particular field we have a lack of specialty, we do not stand out, we do not particularize.
If we do a bit of everything and more or less the same as the others, we endanger ourselves to remain subcritical in every field of research and innovation and we are therefore not so efficient and innovative.
And on the whole, for example, the European
Union, we will have a map with a lot of weaknesses and few strengths.
By using the economists jargon,
I will try to avoid it, most often, we could say that the rare resources here are the agglomeration economies.
And they dissipate when all the regions are in competition to attract the same resources and so ultimately, most remain under criticism.
We will be able to distinguish ourselves only by deepening certain tracks, certain activities.
This is the first reason of specialization.
We will need to make choices, set priorities and specialize to create these critical masses necessary for the efficiency of research and development, creativity and innovation.
Specialization is nothing but a mean to generate these critical mass effects in the regions that can not do everything.
There is a second reason that reinforces the first one.
It takes the limited capacities of the government in front of the complexity and the specificity of innovation systems.
When we seek to form a critical mass in a specific field of R & D and innovation we also try to form an innovation system.
The innovation system is somehow the other face of critical mass.
An innovation system are companies operating in the same field, or connected fields, a few big actors, companies and research centers specialized in this area, additional services and capabilities also specialized and finally the extra-regional networks which allow local actors to increase their ability to benefit from knowledge and resources available elsewhere.
But all these elements of the innovation system are specific depending on the technological field, the specialty that is to be developed.
Each innovation system is different in its composition and its content, depending on the sector or the technology area.
The development, as in Oulu, of a new information technology specialty involves creating certain capabilities and certain infrastructures that will be different from those that should be provided for another specialty.
But the government will not be able to do everything, solve specific problems in each area, in terms of new infrastructures and required capabilities to develop something new.
Again, we must choose.
And so you see that the argument of complexity and specificity of each innovation system joins that of critical mass to motivate a certain specialization given the limited resources both of the regional economy and the regional government.
We will talk about the three other questions in the next video whether it is necessary to specialize, on what, how and when.
