The objective of structural change is, without doubt, reachable without deliberate policy by simply betting on the ability of companies to diversify on the dynamism of startups, on the mobility of people and the motivation of firms to cooperate and combine their knowledge.
All of this can work in certain conditions.
But this does not always work.
We talk now, and to finish, about the failures and structural blockages.
The signs of a failure of entrepreneurial discovery and structural change are numerous.
Weakness of new activities and new industries creation, employment structure which remains dominated by traditional jobs and skills.
Paula Stephan, a colleague, an economist in the United States, analyzed what she called: the "Midwest syndrome".
She described this situation of the midwest states of the US which are states of rich industrial tradition.
These states have invested heavily in an infrastructure of public and scientific training research.
Important and well equipped doctoral programs.
They attracted excellent scientists.
The problem is that those who are trained in advanced research fields will then go to find their first job elsewhere on the west coast, on the east coast.
The figures in this brain drain are striking.
In the 2000s, these states retained on average only 3% of their PhD.
These figures express a big gap between research and quality training and outdated industrial structures, which have not been able to renew by spontaneous processes of structural change and are therefore unable to offer the attractive jobs that these young graduates are looking for.
These failures can come from multiple sources
Lack of entrepreneurial discovery:
Potential new areas of diversification or modernization are not identified or explored.
There are problems of information externality, sorry for the jargon, we'll talk about it again in the second week.
There are also problems of capacities, risks and financing.
There can also be cognitive problems, of creative myopia linked, for example, to the phenomenon of "Company town".
There is only one large company in the region and it tends to overestimate its own capacities, it neglects the external inputs and will have difficulties in engaging in new strategic areas.
There are also problems of collective inertia.
In this case, it is a group of companies which have been successful in a certain field, and because of this exact success, have difficulties to engage and explore new directions.
We can also think about coordination failures and difficulties of all kinds which prevent an entrepreneurial discovery to turn into a new activity to reach a critical size and to eventually lead to a structural change.
It is certain that the importance today of science, and technology in innovation and the complexity of the relevant knowledge bases force to go more than before through partnerships and collaborative networks.
Which makes the entrepreneurial discovery less spontaneous obviously.
Morez is gone, remember.
Pierre Hyacinthe who does everything alone.
The financing of activities, aiming to open and explore a new area, activities that are, by definition, risky, is also more difficult.
Global competition also increases the level of demand.
It is less easy to find a competitive niche and to keep it for a long time.
Even a cluster is not a guarantee, an insurance against all risks that we will be able to produce enough entrepreneurial discoveries.
A cluster is just a structure which has certain spatial concentration characteristics and from which a certain dynamism is expected thanks precisely to its virtues of proximity.
But there is no magical effect.
And a number of clusters are not so dynamic and do not represent the expected engine to trigger the dynamics of entrepreneurial discovery because the simple spatial juxtaposition does not do everything, far from it.
I will take the example of the wind power cluster in the Basque Country.
This cluster has a hundred firms specialized in different stages of development, design and manufacture of wind turbines.
But in front of the competition with new actors, including Chinese actors, few are doing well.
And most of the cluster companies are in danger due to not engaging in exploration of new technological opportunities activities.
Hence the need for a smart specialization strategy or policy which puts in place a process aiming to identify priority areas which will be realized through concrete coordination projects for the development of new transformative activities.
This is precisely the case of smart specialization strategy of the Basque
Country whose one of the components is the energy as a general priority, which brings together several research and innovation projects in the field of wind power cluster.
Offshore, turbines and technology of production.
The spontaneous sequence, the entrepreneurial discovery the new specialty, the structural change, is a big classic of the history of innovations.
But it is probably more difficult today than yesterday and therefore, the spontaneous dynamic of entrepreneurial discovery, of structural change are probably rare.
Most often, we must do much more.
We must put in place a process to identify strategic areas for the future and to stimulate projects in these areas and activities that will allow, ultimately, to obtain a change in structure.
Hence, the importance today of policies that run and coordinate the entrepreneurial discovery process to identify the strategic areas and generate new transformative activities which the region needs.
To make sure also, and we will come back to it, that the maximum information about these areas and their potentiality are diffused.
