In this module, we want to draw your attention to the following difference: the difference between a spontaneous dynamic entrepreneurial discovery and structural change and a smart specialization strategy.
This difference is important to understand two things.
The entrepreneurial discovery in the sense of identification and exploration of a new strategic area, of opportunity which eventually leads to a structural change, is not a new phenomenon.
These entrepreneurial discoveries have allowed in all time for industrial structures to evolve and transform in a spontaneous dynamic framework.
We shall see with examples taken from the history of innovation.
What is new is the idea that today, we need very often, a strategy or a policy for organizing these entrepreneurial discoveries and lead structural change.
We come back here to a graph already seen and we remove everything concerning the organized part of the entrepreneurial discovery.
We have left what concerns the real economy.
The transformation of a sector by an entrepreneurial discovery which occurs naturally or spontaneously thanks to firms capabilities to identify new strategic areas and to exploit it, and thanks to the fact that the activity or the specialty that is generated can grow without much difficulty.
In other words, the structural change can be driven by the natural ability of firms to diversify and create spin-offs which explore new areas by the arrival of new players, etc.
And history is full of these spontaneous processes which often start by entrepreneurial desire to diversify and which result in a structural change that benefits an entire region.
I'll give you some examples.
These are ancient examples that appear to you far from present realities, yet they offer each a particular version of a spontaneous entrepreneurial discovery process which leads to a profound structural change.
It is located in Morez, French Jura, in the factory of Pierre Hyacinthe Cazeaux,
This one has a small nail factory.
He will soon discover that his production system can be adapted fairly easily to the production of eyeglasses.
This is the critical moment of the entrepreneurial discovery which focuses on technology but also on the market opportunity.
Indeed, the market for eyewear is a market on the verge of phenomenal growth.
Pierre Hyacinthe is transforming his production workshop, and goes into the eyewear.
This entrepreneurial discovery informs the entire local community so that other companies enter this new market and complementary capacities are made available.
There is therefore a rise in scale and agglomeration.
A few decades later, Morez will appear as a world capital of eyewear.
The entrepreneurial discovery of Pierre Hyacinthe, and his transformation into new specialty, have created a very significant structural change for the entire region.
The entrepreneur has explored a new area on the basis of important investment relative to its capacity and has assumed great risks.
In the case of Morez we speak here less of diversification than transition from a declining area to a growing field.
Let us now visit Hannibal Abrantes in the small Portuguese town of Marinha Grande in 1920.
Hannibal had a mold manufacturing company for glass.
But its main market stagnates.
And Hannibal also observed the flood of new objects on Europe, plastic objects.
Hannibal will travel across Europe to bring to Marinha Grande all kinds of plastic products: toys, utensils, other products.
And he decided to convert his production facility to start production of molds for the emerging plastics industry.
This entrepreneurial discovery that is, once again, technological and economic, borns a structural change of which we still see today the traces in Marinha Grande.
Two interrelated clusters, molds and plastics industries.
Now we go to a map which I love because I am native of this city and I would like to mention the Lyon-based companies of silk.
The Lyon silk, modern heirs of the Canuts, occupy a prestigious and secure place in the tapestry market, sailing and luxurious fabrics.
Again, the market declines.
But a group of silk entrepreneurs observes from 1950 the advent of composite fibres and polymers.
In collaboration with the Lyon chemistry, they will explore a new area: combine their knowledge with those chemists and develop the specialty of technical fabrics.
Technical fabrics whose markets are of aeronautic, transportation equipment, sporting goods or medical technology.
Famous products like the nose of the Concorde,
Airbus A330 drift or sailing for some boats of the America's
Cup symbolize the success of this process of entrepreneurial discovery.
Again, exploring a new area, spontaneous entrepreneurial discovery led to a major structural change.
Move quickly to Finland now, to quickly evoke the pulp industry.
Here again, a spontaneous entrepreneurial discovery is observed.
These companies facing problems of productivity and product quality come together to explore the potential of nanotechnology in order to improve their operational process and control and regulation,
Here again, a spontaneous entrepreneurial discovery which will provide additional modernization in the sector.
A final example of spontaneous dynamics but this time not about the modernization of industry or the diversification of some companies but rather on the radical creation of a new activity.
We're in the Basel region, northwest of Switzerland in the 60s.
A region known for its chemistry and pharmacy, and also near an exceptional industrial base in the high quality metallurgy and micromechanics domains, especially related to the activity of watchmaking.
I'll tell you the whole story.
These are surgeons who want to revolutionize how they heal fractures at a time when road accidents and those of winter sports multiply.
They bet on osteosynthesis.
Internal fracture fixation with plates and screws, early functional exercise of the patient.
A project whose artistic vision is due to one of them, Martin Allgöwer.
It also combines micromechanics SME, including that of Robert Mathis to make tools and instruments of high quality standard.
This entrepreneurial discovery is at the origin
Of the Swiss medical technology industry that counts today several world leaders.
These stories are very different.
Morez, Marinha Grande, Lyon, Finland, Basel and Biel.
They are much more complicated than what we said.
But our simplification helps to discover a common structure.
In all cases, there was an entrepreneurial discovery, opening and exploring a new area of ​​opportunity and this entrepreneurial discovery turns in a new business and a new specialty which grows by feeding on the entry of new firms, and the agglomeration of complementary activities of suppliers, specialized services, adequate training, which results possibly to the transformation of existing structures.
History is full of cases of smart specialization
With very little public action.
The exploration of a new strategic area to transform a sector or create a new one; and this exploration is provided spontaneously; for example, when it happens within a large company, which looks for some diversification, or when it takes place through collective action of SMEs or tthanks to the persuasiveness and organization of a very entrepreneurial university.
However, history also abounds in blocked industrial structures and missed opportunities; an industrial base that fails to renew itself.
This may concern companies that are weakened and therefore, have poor entrepreneurial capacity.
This would be the opposite of all the examples that we had just seen.
But this can also involve a cluster and there will be no taboo in this course.
We know of many situations of stiff clusters and a little bogged down, which can no longer lead these entrepreneurial discoveries that would allow them to renew; with, as results, structures that don't evolve any more, do not renew any more, do not diversify any more.
We would then need a smart specialization strategy.
