Hi, Jacobo Quintanilla is the Community Engagement Advisor at the International Committee of the Red Cross.
In this video, he will talk about ICT innovations for emergency response.
Talking about technologies for disaster response management,
I think we need to start looking into, first and foremost, how communities use technology and what technology is in the hands of communities today.
Obviously, this question cannot be answered without talking about the role of mobile technology and how mobile technology has revolutionized the way we understand the world and the way we communicate, the way people are able to coordinate around response, share information and start organizing their own response.
There are more mobile phones than people today.
And I think mobile phones have helped people tremendously to share information that is critical before a disaster happens, and also start organizing and coordinating their own response.
Mobile technology is also enabling people to demand greater accountability and participation, not just from their own governments but also from the media and from humanitarian responders like the International Committee of the Red Cross.
One of the most interesting features when talking about technology, including mobile technology, is who has and who has not access to technology.
We said there are more mobile phones than people around the world.
That does not mean that every single human has access to a mobile phone.
What happens to those who do not have access to technology, particularly mobile phones?
And we can think of the most underprivileged and probably most need of assistance who are those who don't have access to technology.
Think of women, think of younger groups.
Think of the elderly, think of the disabled.
We cannot assume because mobile phone is pretty much ubiquitous, that that actually affects and people have access equally.
When we talk about technologies for disaster response and disaster management,
I think one of the first things that we need to take into consideration from my community's perspective is how people are able to access energy and how to reconnect within their own communities.
Something that has emerged as a big issue, finally, within the humanitarian sector is the role of energy and connectivity as form of aid in their own right.
So we can talk as much as we want about access to mobile technology, about smartphones, the internet of things, but if people, at the time when they need it the most, cannot trust the mobile phones-- they cannot connect to the outside world--
I think we are certainly missing a big important point.
We need to increasingly, more and more, look into the role of energy connectivity and how we can provide energy and connectivity as an enabling factor for people to be able to coordinate, to start organizing their response, to communicate with the outside world.
When we look at technologies for disaster response and disaster management, we are looking into the latest emerging technology, we are looking about the Internet of things, we are looking at interconnected devices that are able to transfer data.
I think we still need to really make a strong point for so-called traditional technology such as radio.
Being FM radio or shortwave radio, in many countries around the world is still the technology that has proved to work the best for disaster response and to a certain degree disaster management in terms of sharing life saving, useful and actionable information for disaster affected communities.
This also helps create spaces for dialogue between local communities and responders.
Being a government and also international and local humanitarian organizations.
And the beauty of radio is that you don't need to be literate, you don't need to be able to necessarily own an expensive device.
And this provides the space for dialogue and conversation.
It's not just about we telling them what they need to know.
It's also about creating a two-way communication between local communities and disaster responders.
I think we need to put at the center of anything we do, local communities themselves.
One of the interesting turns of events in recent years is to reinvigorate the discussion about the role of local communities as disaster responders, as communities who always respond first.
It is interesting that we are calling attention to this particular issue because it has always been like that.
As an interesting part that technology brings into this equation is that finally it seems that we are paying more attention to all the different questions and capacities that people always had.
The difference is that 40 or 50 years ago in Biafra, people didn't have the opportunities to make their voices heard that they have today-- in places like Burundi, in places like the Philippines, in places like Yemen.
There's been a-- particularly since Haiti, even though people getting online and collaborating is not something that happened just from Haiti-- but since the earthquake in Haiti in 2010, we saw an emerging group of volunteer and technical communities that crafted this new way of working, what is known as crowd sourcing.
So communities online that put themselves to tasks to try to really help communities in need of assistance.
Social media is transforming-- has transformed-- the world.
Network collaboration, which is the backbone of the internet, is really transforming the way we communicate across the globe, the way we are able to access knowledge, the way we are able to share our opinions, the way we are able to prepare, respond and recover from natural disasters and conflict situations.
I think the question is still, when it gets to social media, is the amount of data which is circulating every single day all around the world, in terms of Tweets, in terms of Instagram posts, in terms of Facebook messages, in terms of everything.
From disaster preparedness and disaster management perspective,
I think the challenge for communities is to actually go through what is good from what is accurate.
One of the most important factors to take into consideration is that, yes, the world is a much more interconnected place, but do we know better, do we know more?
So it is important to look into connectivity and access to social media, not just as a good in it's own right, the question is the content.
What is the water that goes through the pipes?
We have an incredible network around the world, but what is the content that people need to know at a time when knowing the right answer to some questions can be the difference between life and death.
Is there an alternative to social media?
That's a very interesting question.
We always try to answer in one way.
Whatever works in the field.
First and foremost,
I think we should not assume that we understand how people communicate and what questions they are looking answers for.
The most important thing is to go to the source, to the experts and figure out what works for them and what doesn't work for them.
And there's not going to be a silver bullet.
There's not going to be a "killer app", there's not going to be one solution that fits all.
There's always going to be a multi-platform, multi-tiered approach that enables communities to communicate and reconnect from within, to communicate with humanitarian responders and try to figure out what are the best solutions.
Alternatives to social media--
I think we've seen there's nothing that can replace face-to-face human interaction.
The question is in many emergencies around the world-- and this is less of an issue in natural disasters-- when we are talking about armed conflicts, face-to-face it can become a luxury because of security, because of a many number of issues with regard to access doesn't enable us to spend as much time as we would like to be in close proximity with disaster efforts in communities.
So the question is how we can also build proximity 2.0 using whatever technology may work.
But knowing that technology is not going to accommodate everybody.
It is important that we understand how people use technologies and what technologies they use and what technologies they trust.
We just cannot assume that in this country, this is going to be the most used technology.
I think we can assume, but it is important that we understand as well some of those nuances.
Particularly the social cultural implications of using modern technologies and who falls and who doesn't fall through the digital cracks through the gender divide and so on and so forth.
I think there's an interesting role for academia.
We're looking at social scientists as well, looking into helping us understand as well some of these anthropological issues with regard to how people use technology and how people understand information and how they communicate.
The future of social media?
I think we are entering an era of profound connectivity.
I think-- again, the numbers are only going in one direction.
Everything at some point is going to be integrated.
You have the Internet of things, you have wearable devices, you have anything that you can imagine is going to be producing data and leaving data trails, which means that everything is going to be available to people to analyze, to visualize it, to share it.
The future is a much more integrated place.
The numbers are only going into one direction.
I think there may be as well, according to different analysts, a cry for greater privacy and greater opportunity to actually take and extract your data and be private.
The question is when you look at developing countries, do people have the opportunity to actually raise the concerns with regard to data protection on data browsing?
Do actually people have the opportunity to accept or not consent on how we extract information from them?
And I think that's going to be one of the most important debates going forward.
I think the issue of digital literacy is also critical.
I would stress once again that it is not about connectivity and connectivity only.
It's the question: What sort of content do you create today, and what sort of content people need to make decisions that affect their lives and to be able to raise their voice and concern.
In case if someone switches the button and energy and connectivity goes down--
I think we've seen that in many different places.
I think it's a phenomenon to see how creative and generous communities around the world are.
And I think we've seen examples of different ways where people have really turned situations upside down by looking into communicating in different ways.
People will resort to pen and paper.
I remember in the aftermath of the triple disaster in Japan in 2011, if you look at the demographics of those who were caught up in the coastal areas, they were people like our parents and our grandparents, people who do not necessarily have access to mobile phones.
People who don't necessarily know how to function a mobile phone or connect to Twitter or Facebook and so on and so forth.
People resorted in some of those shelters to basically printing wall papers and pasting them on the walls.
That's the way that people access information.
That's the way announcements were made.
So let's not just think that technology is just the silver bullet.
It is-- don't get me wrong-- it is certainly transforming and has transformed the world in unpredictable ways, but when the electricity and connectivity goes down or a party decides to switch it off, people will resort to communicating in the most locally relevant ways, from face-to-face to different messages to motor bikes with messengers, you name it.
When we talk about technology for disaster response and disaster management,
I think it's important as well that we do not forget language.
Most of the technologies are written in language, first and foremost.
Those are languages that are not for everybody at the same time everywhere.
There's also an issue of how we relate with local committees and services and how language in many different locations-- of course it becomes a barrier because we don't understand each other.
There is an interesting development that has been explored over the last few years but is gaining momentum now with regard to machine translation.
And companies which are developing ear piece translators that enable us-- you know, you're speaking Russian and I'm speaking Swahili-- to actually be able to communicate with each other in real time.
That can be a fascinating development in the humanitarian world because it can somehow help us to bridge the gap between people who don't speak and understand the same language.
My take on this whole conversation, very simple, put communities first.
Technology is just a fraction of what the solution can be.
The most important thing is to understand how communities themselves are looking at trying to erase the problems that we have been facing before we arrive and after we leave.
For most of the problems that we have, the technology already exists.
The question is the human component and what the organizations and communities themselves do with that technology.
It is also important to emphasize the fact that technology is not accessible to everybody at the same time everywhere, that technology is also increasing gaps and inequalities... and creating new ones, and as we mentioned,
I think the most important thing is to try to understand and have a more humble and empathetic take on how we look at technology, how we look at communities, first and foremost, because they are first responders and they are experts themselves.
