Hi, Kamilo Melo is a postdoctoral researcher at the Biorobotics Laboratory at EPFL.
He works with search and rescue robotics.
What is search and rescue robotics?
Well, I think it's a broad field that now is taking some of the robotic researchers to try to create solutions for this specific topic which is going to disaster scenarios and use robotics as tools to try to solve problems or try to help the human rescue teams to do their job.
<i>So, about the technology that we use in search and rescue robotics?</i>
I think that most of the people, they believe that only flying robots are the most used robots in search and rescue.
Well indeed, the flying capabilities are very, very useful in the field, because you can take pictures from above, you can take video, you can assess really the whole area of a disaster scenario, but of course you can also use ground robots for actually accessing some places of the disaster region.
Like, for example, a collapsed building-- you try to use a mobile robot to go inside the building, and try to do something else that a flying robot, perhaps, cannot do.
Also, in some scenarios you have water, and that's very complicated, because a ground robot cannot go there, a flying robot cannot go actually under the water, so some unmanned underwater robots can go and assess the situation there.
For example, you can use robotics for forensics.
That means that you can take the robots to assess the structural integrity of a collapsed building, for example.
So in order that other people can, for example, people from insurance, people from other rescue teams, can understand what is the situation before going there with real human power to try to rescue some other victims.
For example, you can also use a robot as a surrogate for a human rescuer, because, for example, the situation can be very difficult-- there is fire, there is maybe a chemical spill of a substance, or maybe also radioactivity-- in this case you can, instead of bringing a human life to rescue another human life, or to assess the situation, you can bring the robot, and I think this is one of the most important reasons why we can use robots in these kinds of disasters.
Another kind of mission is-- this is a little bit after the disaster-- is that robots can help for recovery.
That means that we can use robots as a logistic tool-- for example, something to carry materials.
I think one of the main ideas of using robots is-- and this is a big advantage-- is to avoid a human life to go to a very dangerous place.
Robots can see a little bit farther than a human being-- for example, if you are flying.
Robots can swim farther than a human being in one of these situations, because they can also swim in a little space, a confined space.
They can swim with turbid water, for example, and a human diver maybe cannot do that.
So if you ask me about the strengths and the weaknesses of robots,
I think we are, as researchers, we are still discovering these kinds of strengths or disadvantages of the robots.
Sometimes, for example, you believe that your robot will be sturdy enough, but then you figure out that there is mud, that there is water, and perhaps your robot is not going to work in that terrain.
Sometimes you believe that your battery is enough, or it has enough power to go somewhere, or to have a long mission, but at the end it happens that your battery is not enough.
So these are a little bit of disadvantages that you really don't know at the beginning of the mission.
And actually, when you are building the robot, when you are actually constructing the machine and all this, you can kind of guess what is going to happen then, but in the real field, something completely different can happen.
Another challenge we have in rescue robotics is integration, not only of the robot with the human team, but maybe also integration of several robots.
So that's something that I do in my research.
We try to basically integrate geographical information systems, communication systems, and robots doing different tasks, and different types of robots, actually.
For example, you have a flying robot who creates the map, and the map now is processed by the mobile robot, who goes through the terrain, and perhaps this mobile robot deploys another robot, in some specific case, for example an underwater robot, or something like that.
So this kind of integration is also very important, and, of course, on the human side, to basically interact with these robots is also another important aspect.
You're not just watching the robots doing nothing, but you're actually integrating and commanding robots to do this, or that, or basically reviewing all the data that the robots are creating.
I belong to a committee that is called the International Committee in Robotics for Disaster Risk Reduction.
And basically in our meetings what we talk about is we need to create this kind of standardization, we need to provide this standardization of methods and, basically, rules to use robots in the field, and also to procure that, for example, rescue organizations can adopt this kind of technology.
Imagine that you are a fireman, and you, for years, had been using your hose to spray water on the fires, and you use your axe to cut and break through some difficult terrain and so on.
If you come with a robot, and you say,
"This robot can do the same as you."
The first reaction: you will say, "I don't think so."
Because, yeah, you cannot have the same mobility as me, you don't perhaps have the same strength as me, and, of course, I can think while I'm in the field, maybe a robot cannot do that.
And if you are tele-operating your robot, maybe it's too difficult to see through a little screen, and to access the places, or actually do the same as we do, as a real fireman, let's say.
Of course, for them, it will be very difficult at the beginning, to understand this as a replacement for them, but we don't try to do this.
We're just trying to provide a tool.
So that means that, somehow, a robot can help people to do that.
The security aspects of a robot-- of course you have to take this into account.
Let's put an example of a robot for a disaster inside a mine.
So when the mine collapses, maybe there is also gas trapped inside the mine that you cannot fire out, because you will blow up the whole mine, also with the people trapped there.
So in this case, your robot needs to fulfill some specifications about explosion-proof and, of course, you cannot create sparks, for example.
How to create your machines in order to assess the correct environment, with the minimal harm.
When you are using flying robots you need to control it by radio frequency.
So this is another aspect that you have to care about, because if you're controlling with some specific frequencies, maybe those frequencies, in that specific scenario, are restricted.
I don't know, for some communications, maybe communication has a priority on top of use of these radio frequencies, for some other reasons, so in this case you need to provide your communication system with another frequency.
So you need to be aware of those things.
So far, I think, as I mentioned, it's very difficult for some organizations to adopt robots, either because they are expensive, or because they need a lot of maintenance, or because, simply, they don't believe too much in this technology.
I think in this case there are very, very few organizations--
I know, for example, some fire departments in the U.S., they own robots, actually, but normally, in other civilian organizations around the world, they still don't know robots.
Another type of organization who can have these kinds of robots are universities and research centers, because actually that's what we do here, for example.
We try to produce these robots for assessing these situations, but the problem is that we are still in research, that means that we don't have final products.
So in this case, also, according to the mission, maybe it's not the best way to deploy one of our robots, because it's still a prototype.
<i>About research in search and rescue robotics?</i>
I think, well, we are doing a lot of great things.
Actually, we have our international conference and this thing which is called
International Symposium on Safety,
Security and Rescue Robotics, and many researchers are trying to basically improve their machines, improve their methods, and to try to come with machines that really can go directly to industry.
So this is another part which, of course, you need to pass through a lot of processes in order to bring a prototype from research, or from academia, directly to the industry.
There is no market yet for these kinds of robots.
So it's very difficult for an industry to start doing and producing search and rescue robots if you really don't know who is going to buy this thing.
So that's why the pace is very slow.
This whole field started by converting conventional robots into a search and rescue robot.
That means that all the money that you have to put in the robot that, per se, is expensive, is a little bit more, so at the end the machine will be really, really something very expensive.
But, of course, researchers now are starting to do robots thinking directly into being cheap and to be real assets for a mission, because the most important thing is that, remember, you want to keep a human life, instead of a robot.
So in this case, if you come with a very, very expensive machine, it's too expensive, maybe you don't want to risk the machine, so this is not good.
But in the other side, if you go with a very cheap robot, perhaps it doesn't fulfill all the specifications, and the robot will not really perform very well in the situation.
But there is a meeting point, where you can really go with a good machine to do that.
And lately there is this trend of trying to reduce, or produce very cheap and very simple robots which are basically disposable robots, for some specific missions.
I'm not talking like going into a very difficult terrain, and trying to assess a situation, or trying to assess the structural integrity of a place, but maybe just to work as a radio beacon, maybe to work as a sensor, or something like that, and you can deploy many of them, as they are disposable, you really don't care too much about the price of these things.
As a researcher, we are still in prototype phases, let's say, but we really want to go to a real scenario.
We are doing some tests, actually here in Switzerland, we try to do exercises, for example, along with the Army, to try to use real scenarios to bring the robots and to test the capabilities of the robots in order to be, perhaps in the future, ready for some real missions.
