Welcome back.
Now in this session I will talk about the key elements of the urban electricity system.
What is important here is the electricity infrastructure, the consumption of electricity, the production of electricity, and all kind of intermediaries that have now emerged in recent years in urban electricity.
Of course, production comes first, as you know, because electricity has to be produced, but the reason why I nevertheless start with electricity infrastructures is because the electricity utility, in the city, is mainly concerned with the infrastructure and its operations.
So, how does that infrastructure exactly work?
The electricity is produced outside of the city, comes into a city by way of cables, either above-the-ground cables, or underground cables.
The trend, of course, is to put electricity underground, but there is still a lot of above-ground high-voltage or medium-voltage electricity coming into the city.
This electricity is then transformed to lower voltage levels, and fed into distribution cables which, again, can be above or under the ground.
Their characteristic is that they go directly to each of the households where then electricity is consumed.
The important element is this transformer here, and in many cities you can see transforming stations right in the heart of the city, where the high-voltage electricity is transformed into low-voltage electricity.
As I said before, this is the core business, the core activity, of the urban electricity utility.
It operates the grid, and we will say later what that means in terms of challenges, operating the electricity grid.
It operates the high-voltage grid, the medium-voltage grid, the different transformers, and the distribution cables.
Now, let's talk about consumption first.
So, at the end of the line, connected to the grid, usually to the distribution grid, to the low-voltage grid, are the households, the individual consumers.
What is also connected to the grid, and, generally, at a higher voltage level, are the industrial, or the commercial consumers: factories, shopping malls, big bus stations, they are all connected to the electricity grid, and they're consuming the electricity that is being brought into the city by way of the different cables.
Now, in terms of production, we have already seen electricity is generally produced outside of the city.
It is generally produced, traditionally it is produced by big generation plants: fossil-fuel plants, coal plants, gas plants, nuclear-power plants, and you easily understand why these production generation plants cannot be located inside of the city-- they are polluting, or they have other risks, and therefore they are often quite away from the city, and that energy is then brought into the city.
Now there is some back-up generation inside the city, especially hospitals, some factories.
Particularly vulnerable, sensitive industries that cannot afford electricity cuts have their own back-up generation capacity in case there is a blackout, or there is another problem in electricity distribution.
The main characteristic of back-up generation is that it is purely for internal use.
It is generally not used to feed electricity back into the grid.
For this we see other things emerging in recent years, and this is self-generation.
Companies are self-generating, and increasingly with solar energy.
Solar panels on their roofs, the households are starting to generate their own electricity, which they sometimes consume.
But sometimes, when they produce too much, they feed it back into the grid, and that creates all kind of problems for managers of urban electricity infrastructure systems, because they have to deal with this kind of self-generation.
They have to feed it, they have to manage it inside the broader grid and stabilize the grid.
Now let's talk about intermediaries.
So, historically, the households, the companies, the firms, the industrial consumers, they buy their electricity from their local utility, the same one that manages the grid and the distribution.
The local utility here is a reseller.
Very rarely does the local electricity utility actually produce electricity; it buys it itself from a generation plant, from a producer.
But it acts as a reseller and, historically, it had a monopoly.
It was the only one allowed to sell electricity to the households.
But now, with liberalization, in Europe, the United States, and many other emerging countries, electricity markets have actually been liberalized.
This means that the households, and the industrial and commercial consumers have the possibility to buy their electricity from someone else than the utility as a reseller.
So there are other resellers popping up, and the consumer actually has a choice from whom to buy its electricity.
So we have some competition here-- and we have seen earlier in the course about competition in utility services provision-- and this competition, it is important to understand, is about the energy, about the electricity.
It is not competition about the distribution.
Just as a little explanation here, in the final household price, what you, as a final consumer, pay to somebody, is basically three things.
You pay the use of the infrastructure.
This is monopolistic.
You pay it to the local utility, and it is regulated.
Then you pay the electricity that you consume, usually about a third to half of the costs of what you pay.
This is competitive, you can choose, and you pay it to the reseller, which can or cannot be your local utility.
And then you pay taxes to the local administration, to the local authorities, and there you do not have a choice.
Now, as liberalization goes on, we see a new type of actor emerging, and those are traders.
Now traders are not really affecting the way the urban electricity system works, but of course they are important, because now the utility, as a reseller, can either buy directly from a power-generating plant, or it can buy its electricity from a trader, which operates basically in the same way as a financial trader operates.
But this is not really at the center of what we study here, in urban infrastructures.
And the last element, which is also a very recent edition to the whole urban energy and electricity system, are so-called "energy services companies."
They may be resellers-- that is, they sell you electricity as a household, but they also sell you the services to save electricity, and to save energy more generally, so as to consume less electricity.
And they make their money by way of the energy that you have been saving.
Again, we will not talk very much about that in the future, but it's certainly a new phenomenon in urban electricity infrastructures.
What have I done in this session?
I have tried to explain to you how the urban electricity system works.
In the next session,
I will talk about the management of it, what all this means in terms of management, and what the main challenges are for management.
Stay tuned.
