What are the reasons that explain why there are not enough x-ray machines available in the district hospitals?
I can see multiple factors.
The first one being the supplied equipment was obsolete, too old, they are often given so they are old and poorly installed, and barely work or not at all.
The environmental elements that compromises a longer life of the donated equipment in our context is firstly the electric network and its instability too.
The supply is not constant there are often power cuts.
And as for the instability the frequent variations of electric tension.
I think that this is  on one of the main sources of trouble.
Now secondly, the climate issues that are not always taken into account when the equipment is made: the heat that compromises the viability of certain imaging detectors, the dust getting in, and also the humidity, in certains departments.
For the heat it is not just because the zone is tropical globally, these are hot countries but another problem is, the lack of means we can't always use an air conditioner, and even when we manage to get one you need money for the maintenance, and good quality electric energy for it to work.
So there are elements that are related to the environment, 
But there are also elements linked to humans because these are machines that are essentially fragile, you need to be well trained to use them, then, the structures need to have sufficient means for the maintenance, particularly preventive maintenant.
Even if we have the means for the preventive maintenance we need properly trained biomedical engineers and enough of them available.
So the factors are multiple.
We can dream of having x-rays here, the equipment needs to come first.
Meaning the equipment that is adapted to our conditions and our environment and that we find everywhere.
So the GlobalDiagnostiX project from my point of view, is a bit of a crazy dream, the dream of some well intentioned people that found out that although the need is in southern countries the ressources are mainly in northern countries.
Well intentioned people who noted that in southern countries we have a lot of diseases illnesses, that need x-ray equipment, at least standard radiologie machines, the accidents, the lung diseases, certain types on emergencies, that need the presence, the availability, of x-rays and yet this is not available in most hospitals on the outskirts, especially in the district hospitals.
It's therefore the crazy dream of people who hope to fix that, to bring solutions.
The GlobalDiagnostiX project, in a common initiative of people in Switzerland and Cameroon who are trying to make available as quickly as possible, standard radiology machine but that it is digital and able to resist to all the strains that the currently available machines go under and with a global cost including the maintenance the amortization cost, which is reasonable, maybe even less than what is already available.
The GlobalDiagnostiX project will offer a standard x ray machine able to withstand the electric current, working on battery power for certain lengths of time so staying on even if there is a power cut, a machine that is mechanically solid, designed to be airtight to dust infiltration with a detector designed to resist against high temperatures, with controls based essentially relying on mechanical movements and not electronic ones, like the previous machines, these electric controls being a primary source of break downs. 
An intuitive radiography equipment because we are planning a work station that guides the operator given that there won't be one in every district hospital people trained to do standard radiology the machine could indicate what steps to take for someone who hasn't been properly trained.
The machine will also contain module to help interpret the typical images, to recognise the good quality pictures.
And as for the marketing, the GlobalDiagnostiX associated with a company that will commercialise the machine that has already been created, which will be offering equipment that has already been sold not one year but a few years warranty ideally around a 6 year. 
Also preventive maintenance is included in the sale price that comes also with a training course for the technician but also for the local consultant to use the equipment properly.
So not to drag on, this project is based on concrete observations of the difficulties we face and is offering to answer point by point the principal difficulties.
And what we forgot to say, is that in its conception, the local teams in Cameroon, chosen as the pilot country, are implicated at each stage whether it be the in design of the machine or for the interface for obtaining the images whether it be the questions linked to the norms of radiology benefitting from the expertise of the national radioprotection agency or for the contextual elements or anthropological aspects its acceptability by the personnel in a tropical area, etc.
So at each stage we are consulted and every time when it is necessary the parts of the machine come to Cameroon to be tested in their future place of use.
Globally the GlobalDiagnostiX project, is trying to propose to southern countries a swiss army knife for radiology or, according to us, an untameable lion (Camerooninan soccer team) of imagery so that is the GlobalDiagnostiX project, according to us.
