Welcome to today's lesson about governance by local communities. 
It's a type of governance that has enjoyed a definite interest throughout the whole of Africa for at least the last 30 years.
Of course, a good way to find out more would be to have a look at our now familiar guidelines on the governance of protected areas, edited by the World Commission.
In particular, take a look at the end of chapter three, which focuses specifically on different forms of governance, including community governance.
To complement this reading, it could also be useful to consult the report of a study carried out by PAPACO on community protected areas in West Africa, and the 25th edition of the NAPA letters, which has a short introduction about them.
Let's now see with Paul, the context for the increase in the number of community protected areas in Africa.
The difficulties met by states to extend protected areas governed by the government has offered many opportunities for community protected areas to develop.
It's in fact a process that is supported by a context of taking responsibility for local issues; a process that is strengthened itself by decentralization policies that involved some of environmental fields, including the management of natural resources.
Community protected areas represent a recent and interesting form of governance due to the hopes for positive responses to the various shortages discovered by the state protected areas that were already in place.
The recent willingness of the African states to concede their powers to local collectivities has been the first stage in the decentralization in terms of conservation.
These collectivities have sometimes benefited from it in order to create local protected areas, just as the law gave them the possibility to do.
The community protected areas, which are the result of a process of decentralization, are roughly the following: the governance system is controlled by the local communities; the legal status is recognized, and of course, it's within a well defined space.
Also, the management objectives prioritize conservation, and the recognized usage rights are to the advantage of the people.
Of course, the community protected areas can be terrestrial.
That's the case, for example, of community natural reserves which were established in Senegal.
But these protected areas can also be aquatic.
That's the case with marine community protected areas.
Or land and water can be combined:
That's the case of the famous marine protected area of Bamboung, in the Saloum Delta.
So, let's have a look at the special case of this Bamboung reserve, which causes quite a stir in Senegal.
Its manager will tell us a bit more about it.
Yes, the community marine protected area of
Bamboung is the first marine area created in Senegal by the people.
These populations managed these lands for a long time, before there was a presidential decree.
And now, the arrival of the decree has enabled populations to have a collective conscience.
They also knew about the commitments that the state of Senegal have made, and that have empowered them in their way of managing the area.
Now a collective conscience was born from this, and the behaviours that really did not coincide at all with managing the environment well were forbidden by the people themselves.
And that is thanks to management rules being applied and implemented, rules which were pre-established by the people themselves, and which were adopted by state authority.
So that enabled the populations to integrate the whole of the 14 outlying villages of the community marine protected area of
Bamboung.
This was through village meetings, where their representatives were designated.
These representatives are currently in what we call a management committee.
And this management committee is comprised of all of the delegates from the 14 outlying villages, and there is an executive committee with its functional commissions.
This has enabled them to take a big step forward and progress towards conservation.
Regarding protected areas, local populations, who were previously considered to be predators or destroyers of what conservation has already achieved, have progressively changed their attitude after being faced with a shortage of easily accessible natural resources.
Due to the impulsiveness of motivated groups, the initiative of creating community protected areas came about.
This brought the advantage of producing a significant increase in land dedicated to conservation.
We are not lacking in examples to demonstrate this change, and as Paul has just told us, it is a wonderful source for extra protected areas, in spaces that the state could not have or would not have wanted to manage anyway.
Let's look at an example in the south of Benin.
We have noticed that, at the regional level, and in the Mono Delta, there are no protected areas.
Loss of habitat and poaching are the biggest threats.
For their subsistence, local communities depend on the nature that surrounds them.
Consequently, they are the key to successfully preserving nature.
My name is Dhossou Alain,
I am the coordinator for the NGO Africa Mobile
Nature.
Here, we are in Gogohondji village, located in the commune of Houéyogbé, in the Doutou county.
It's a waterside village by the Toho lake, where a community reserve is in the process of being formed.
We are pleased to welcome you to our village.
We will show you around the reserve that is being created.
It is a reserve rich in biodiversity.
There are many species, including the sitatunga, crocodiles, boas, turtles, and other aquatic animals...
We started, for example, raising awareness after we noticed that poaching was placing a burden on the animals.
We are starting to grow closer to the hunters and we have started to identify them by where they live.
And we have started to have discussions with them, and we have grown closer to the authorities, to certain authorities that are closer to the reserve and that will be able to intervene in the zone anyway.
Since we intervened here, we have really noticed that, these days, the poaching rate has decreased.
There are still numerous constraints though: the small size of each community protected area considered individually, insufficient coordination, networks that need to be created, technical abilities that need strengthening, changes in objectives that need to be monitored, a valuation that needs to be set up, etc.
This governance model is in the process of being developed, and it will probably continue to evolve.
The positive aspect is it enables certain cultural practices, which are positive for conservation, to be valued, as we will see in a later sequence of this lesson, which will mainly be about culture.
A good place to demonstrate this is the Bissagos
Islands in Guinea-Bissau.
Augusta Henriques from the NGO Tiniguena will explain it to us.
The Urok community area possesses essential characteristics regarding community.
Cultural inclusion:
Management rules are inspired of traditional management rules.
And within traditional management, women have a role in all the stages of exploiting strategic resources, for example, shells for food security.
We cannot be efficient when managing resources if women are not included.
So it isn't so much a question of equal rights, but more a question of efficiency.
It has to be said, thanks to the impulse from collectivities or local communities more and more community protected areas are being set up with different aspects depending on the country, depending on the laws in place and depending on the habits.
But we also need to specify that decentralization does not explain everything.
With regards to this, the marine space very rarely has concessions made for it by the state.
That is particularly the case in Senegal.
It has however not stopped community initiatives to spring up for conservation in the marine field with the support of state technical services.
There's a nice story told to us from Senegal.
That's the end of the lesson.
The next episode will be about shared governance of protected areas.
Have an excellent day.
