By launching the Octave or Matlab software, the interface window graphic, the Gui will open.
We'll find out together.
There is also the possibility to run them  in a terminal, but that is not intuitive as a beginner.
We will switch to interactive mode.
Here is the graphic interface as it appears in Mac OS.
On Linux or Windows, it is very similar.
And here I Octave, but Matlab has the same principle.
There is a command window with the prompt.
This is where you will type simple commands.
There is a workspace where we find the variables that can be defined.
Here is the history of the last commands that were given by the user and there is the current directory also called the Path.
You can also change the Path, we will rather work in the Octave introduction directory.
And you can see that I have some functions already defined.
There are already files we going to use during the course.
When I clicked 2 times on the introduction to Octave directory, there is also the Current directory, the current directory has changed.
You can also change it from here.
If you need help, your best friend is the help.
For example, you can type help sinus, it will give you help on the sinus function.
Sinus is a multi function,i.e, it is already encoded in Matlab or Octave and we're told where it is implemented.
This you do not need to know.
The interesting thing is to know what it does.
This is a very simple function, so it will just calculate the sine of the value X.
After, we are advised to look at other possible functions and eventually use the doc.
What is the doc?
The doc is a more complex interface other than help.
If you type doc, you have some sort of browser in order scroll among the various functions and see other features that use sinus or other commands.
For example, I can go back to the command window and type doc sinus and here, I have several possible help where there is the keyword that appears sinus.
We can also look at the plot documentation and here there is help for the function plot that appears with other functions too.
What is essential now is having seen that there is a command window where you can type commands that you want to run, there is a work area, there is the history of commands if one wants to recover some commands that have been executed, we can change the directory if we want and we can also search for documentation or help directly in the software.
You can also look on the Internet, there is often more detailed or differentiated help compared to what is already written in the software.
