Hello.
- And welcome to our course--
- Launching New Ventures!
I'm Chris Tucci, Professor of 
Corporate Strategy and Innovation at EPFL and Dean of the College of Management.
I'm Marc Gruber,
Professor of Entrepreneurship and Technology Commercialization at the same institution.
We both work for EPFL, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, Switzerland.
EPFL is a hotbed of entreprenuership and innovation.
This enables us to study the creation of high technology ventures, and to work with the companies to help them become more successful.
In fact, at EPFL , two companies each and every month get founded.
Chris and I have designed the course especially for you, with the help of our wonderful assistants.
You will be seeing both of us during the course, and you will be hearing directly from a range of entrepreneurs that come from many, many nations across the globe.
The content for this course draws on our experience in research of over 10,000 companies, giving us a solid underpinning of any frameworks, tools, and tricks that we might discuss.
But, our advice isn't purely theoretical.
It's also been applied and tested with real people who've started successful companies.
The course also builds on our experience teaching Bachelor's, Masters, and Executive Education classes for more than a decade.
This is the first time that we've been able to combine all of this content into a MOOC format, and we are very excited to share that content with you.
And the course is full of jokes, and we promise not to make it boring.
- Who, us? Boring?
- No boring. (Laughter)
This course is designed for people who want to start a new venture, especially those interested in a growth opportunity.
What is important for us is that you understand the types of challenges and opportunities faced by entrepreneurs, that you actually see the differences between startup management and the management in established companies.
So, in this course, you will learn how to identify and evaluate business opportunities, how to creatively market your solutions, how to raise funds, how to manage your funds, how to set up a compelling crowdfunding campaign--
And how to profit economically from your innovation.
So, if you have a general interest 
In entrepreneurship, or maybe, toy with an idea already, or you already embarked on an entrepreneurial journey, this course is for you!
We will test your progress throughout this course with our quizzes, and as a final assignment you will actually draft your business concept proposal and your crowdfunding campaign.
And if that isn't interesting enough, the top three performers in this course will also be awarded 2,500 dollars.
And if that isn't enough, this course is entirely free.
- Free?
- Free.
So, if you are now excited to join this course you can do so, and we'll be happy to support you on your entrepreneurial journey, and you can sign up now.
This was completely improvised in the end.
That was alright, actually.
That's OK.
