Before writing our functions and script for the main program, it will be placed in a directory dedicated to this program.
So I go into my usual directory for my Octave or MATLAB functions.
Then here I createa new directory that I call Program
I go into this directory.
Now when I run something, it will first look if ther are MATLAB or Octave functions in this directory.
The main program, I'll put in a script that I call callPlot.
We opened the file or script and you see callPlot
I have written the program definition with the main program and instructions, so I have them at hand, if I want to watch them again.
I will write the main program and the first thing to do is to clean all my variables and also close all windows.
That way I'm sure that there are no windows or variables that disturb my work.
It also requires that on the user's hand, it be capable to enter a choice and that choice taken into account.
Already, I will use the variable choice, and I will use the same numbers in the description of the main program.
So 1 will be the explanation for the program; until 7 which was that out.
So the side of a default choice is 1.
For the choice, I would like the user to have the explanation of the program.
But in general, we need to give the possibility for the user to make a choice.
So that it can be done with the menu function.
We did not order, we will study it now.
Menu, what it does?
This is a function that asks a question to the user.
For example: "Make your choice."
That's the first thing that is written and after, it must be given a description of the possible choices.
So for example the first choice is
"Explain."
The second choice is
"Change the axes."
Then I'd go to the line, then I do "..." and it is understood as if there was a line that went on.
After, I can say "Draw an ellipse."
This is the third choice.
Then, the fourth "Draw ellipses in the file."
I forgot the quotes.
Then "Change accuracy"
"Clean the figure" and "Get out of the program."
We can already try to run the program you just wrote to be sure of what this menu function.
I run my program.
It asked me to make a choice.
I choose for example 2 and
I can see that the choice is variable.
Now that we know how to get the choice, we must continue to ask what choice and execute the selected command, so choice is different from seven.
So we will have to make a loop with respect to the variable choice and we will continue to do something since the choice is different from 7
And we finished this loop if you choose 7.
What should you do in this loop?
We must make a switch so select with respect to the variable of choice.
So I switch choice.
The first case is if we take 1 and in this case, it will call the function explainProgram.
This is a function that we want to write allows us to explain the program.
A second case is when you want to pick axes and change them.
For example, I can say in this case it will ask axes and change: modifyAxes.
So myAxes variable is from the function askAxes and then it will pass this new feature which is modifyAxes.
The third case, is when you want to request an ellipse to the user and draw it.
So you have to save the data, four data center coordinates, the minimum and maximum principal axes,
So the ellipse; it must be requested.
We will use askEllipse function.
And once it has requested, we will use plotEllipse of this ellipse.
The fourth case, is the case where we want to upload a file and in this file, it's full of ellipses.
How is this file?
You can download it from the course website.
I called it cheeseEllipses.
Here is where the file was saved several ellipses.
An ellipse is given by its center, so two coordinates, the axis relative to coordinate 1 and the axis with respect to the coordinate 2.
There is a mathematical formula that tells us how the ellipse is defined, just the perimeter of the ellipse or the smallest is equal to 1 if we also want the area.
This is the mathematical formula, we will instead not use an implicit mathematical formula, but rather a parametric mathematical formula.
We will see later.
For each line, we have the numbers and then other numbers.
On a line, there is the coordinate of the center, the first coordinate and the second coordinate; then the axis along coordinate 1 and the axis along the coordinate 2.
We want to load the file and have it in a matrix all these data and we should be able to loop through all these lines to display all ellipses.
Note that there are% at the beginning of the line, those will not be loaded by the load function.
The load function will ignore them and just take these two lines.
Our choice number 4 should provide a side to load this file and also to draw all ellipses.
We will do it in a single function called loadFileAndPlot.
This is a function that will do it all.
Then there is the case number 5.
The case number 5, is to define the precision of our figure.
While the accuracy of our figure, we will give a Npoints variable.
This precision, it is also transmitted to the plot.
So first, let's ask this to the user, but it will also make the drawing of the ellipse.
So you have to say it, it is a variable of plotEllypse function.
And if we used loadFileAndPlot it will also draw ellipses, it will pass this variable as well.
The case number 6 is clean Figure
So if we clean the face, it's simply clf.
And then the case number 7.
As such, it should not even happen i this case because they will be out of the loop.
So we do not need to.
We can close our switch.
And in the end, we will re ask the choice, or rather, we will ask the first time.
And here ends the while loop.
The next step will be to write these functions.
Before you write, you must analyze them a bit.
You should know what are the inputs and outputs before writing them, analyze a little.
It will know what are the inputs and outputs of each of these functions, and perhaps there are some of these functions we will use again.
Typically, the function will likely be used plotEllipse as in the case of number 4 loadFileAndPlot.
