Hello, welcome to the 
Elements de Géomatique course.
This is a basic course for civil engineering students, as well as for other people interested in topography, in geographical information systems and in the gathering of data for spatial references.
This introductory part is composed of the following elements: some definitions an introduction with examples, what is geomatics?
A description of the course objectives, course syllabus, as well as the didactic approach of the different educational resources that are at your disposal and finally the evaluation methods for the course.
Geomatics! Geomatics is a relatively new term that is composed of <i>geo</i>, Earth and <i>matics</i>, which comes from informatics.
So, it's ultimately information technologies in service of geography and all the data that affect the spatial domaine.
Among the different geomatics disciplines we can already mention land surveying which is a set of methods that allow you to obtain geographical data from the ground or from an airplane.
There's also the discipline of geodesy, which is the science of the study of the shape and geometry of the Earth.
There are also other disciplines related to the gathering such as, for example, photogrammetry as remote sensing.
This methods are image based and permit the observation of earth and also a measure of objects on the territory.
It is finally all the elements that permit the representation of geographical objects with cartography methods,
3D visualizations and management systems called
"Geographic Information System" which is usually just called GIS.
In order to illustrate what geomatics is, we will take two examples.
A first example in natural terrain is the Arolla glacier.
We are interested in measuring the retreat of the glacier's front.
On this image you can see the typical scenery with the front of the Arolla glacier here and this part in front here characterizes the moraine and a watercourse also, because it's summer and the glacier is melting.
If we get closer to the glacier, we can see the elements that interest us
In this case, here the measure of a series of particular points that I will connect here with a line and that effectively describe the glacier's front.
You can see a stake here with a specific measuring point so the objective here is to measure, with surveying methods, in this case, a theodolite or GPS.
We will measure particular points in coordinates, so that we can document the observed state in this year and view its evolution over time.
If I now look at up the points on a map,
I have on this example here my coordinate system with the different time periods, here, between 2000 and 2002, I have here the glacier front for the period of 2002, and I have in the upper part the glacier front for the period of 2000.
So we can see the separation of the two front lines.
More concretely, if I come here on an enlargement of the zone and look at what is happening here between the two periods and I have a difference, that I can measure here, planimetric of about 15m as the annual regression of this glacier tongue.
What is more interesting compared to the map, is to transfer these elements to the terrain and for this, we will undertake a surveying process that's called implantation.
Impantation consits of, starting with coordinates of the previous state, if I take my coordinates of the previous year here, and I can implant these points it means, move from my collection of XY coordinates to a reality on the field. 
This reality is represented by a set
of stakes planted on the field at the location at which the front line of the previous year was effectively measured.
And if I now look at the current front line well, there is a discrepancy here in life size, in actual size, you can see here a student's height.
And we can effectively see these 15m of discrepancy that we have in this example. 
Another example related to cartography. 
You have a territory here that is well known to EPFL students:
It's our campus grounds, but in 1953.
So you have here the national map with the area of EPFL, which at that time wasn't anything but fields and crops.
On this map, you can find the soil cover you can find construction elements, you can find the hydrographic network.
And you can also find the different communication lines: the streets and country roads.
If I move to a subsequent time period, to 1980, which corresponds to the first construction phase of our campus.
You can see the evolution the way it was mapped in 1980 with a form of urbanization that's starting to develop around the school.
If I now move to the state,
I'll say more recent, 2011 where we find our campus the way we know it.
You can see this strong urbanization and the map effectively seves as a support to document the history of our territory's evolution. 
It's a valuable document that the Géomatique uses to understand the dynamics of the evolution of our territories and landscapes.
Géomatique, what is finally needed to document the evolution of our natural and built environment?
We have talked about the glacier example, of a repository of coordinates. 
So the first thing that needs to be used effectively is a coordinate system, if possible in 3 dimensions with planimetrics and a vertical altitude component. 
Next, we will come to measure objects in the world surrounding us. that we'll refer to as the "real world".
We will come with a certain number of instruments which are for example surveying instruments that are terrestrial or today with the help of satellites such as GPS for example.
And we will be able to measure this real world, measure objects in this world.
Next, we come to a section,
I'll say more informatic. 
I'll draw a little screen here
With an information system stored in a database.
So, we have here all the methods of managing and representing spatial information.
Here is a little about the elements that are required to document this evolution.
We can see them on this figure with the different pillars that are the acquisition of spatial reference data.
Next all the their processing, their representation, whether it's on the maps or on tridimensional models and finally a diffusion via different Internet channels that are known today with different geo data servers available to everyone.
What are the objectives of this geomatics cours?
First of all, it's about giving an overview of geomatics
And the different measurement techniques
Next, about presenting methods utilized for the acquisition, the representation and management of spatial references data.
If we take an example here of an engineering project, we will first plan interventions, prepare a project, for this we need field operations where we model objects, we will make the aquisition with topometric methods. 
Next, we will return to the office with the cartographie operations, of representation. We'll have to create plans and maps for the making of the survey.
And finally, we will go to into the field to realize the project with implementational operations.
Once the project is completed, we will do a survey which will be archived for the purpose of conserving documents.
What is the content of the geomatics course?
First of all, we'll give an introduction of geomatics.
Next we have the basics of geodesy with all the definitions the coordinates systems.
Next, a section dedicated to cartographic representations and afterwards we have the different methods of acquisition.
We'll concentrate on the geometric level, on the utilisation of theodolites for its orientation and its lifting operations.
Next there are distance measurements, also related to the levées and afterwards we tackle the spatial surveying with GPS.
Finally, we process the numeric terrain model, its modeling and its utilisation for altimetry questions.
The didactic approach proposed in this course is between the basic sciences that you have in the different engineering schools.
These are mathematics, physics, algebra, informatics and finally engineering sciences, namely construction, civil engineering, development, environment.
It's a little bit at the interface between the disciplines.
And in this course we will put an emphasis on modeling concepts independent of technologies.
On the level of basic knowledge, it's not necessary to have in-depth knowledge.
It's a first year course.
On the other hand, it's necessary to have some knowledge of geometry, algebra and trigonometry. 
These are the main equations that we will use for the topometric methods.
An important point in this approach is the rigor in the calculation work.
Concepts of precision, of reliability are fundamental in geodesy, in topometrics. 
So we will focus on these issues in different calculation exercises.
In terms of pedagogic resources, you have an entire series of course videos that explain the principles and methods a little bit with some sets of questions that allow you to reflect the problematic in a video sequence.
Aside from that, we have an entire series of hands-on videos, because surveying and geomatics happen in the field.
And because of this, we have a video series that illustrates the methods in a more concrete context.
This field aspect is important for the course.
You also have a quiz series, with multiple-choice questions or with numeric answers when it's about calculations.
As another pedagogic resource you can find the handouts,
"éléments géomatiques" that are for sale for courses here at EPFL.
But for people who are taking this course from far away there are pd files for each lesson that resume the principal chapter that is discussed in the module in question.
You also have some calculation tools online on the internet, to help you a little in approaching topometric calculations
And finally, you have topometric calculation exercises as well as the use of some software tools for the representation of spatial data, for the calculation of numeric field models.
How will the course evaluation be conducted?
It will be done for each lesson, for each module, with a quiz series and a main exercise, which will often be a calculation exercise or data representation with spatial reference and at the end of all the modules and lessons you will have a certain number of quizzes that will be evaluated and graded and a certain number of exercises.
You'll have a weighting for the final grade with 40% for the quizzes and 60% for the exercices.
This will give you the final grade for the module.
