This is a view of the Earth from low Earth orbit.
Low Earth orbit, like the name indicates, is relatively low, typically a few hundred kilometers above the Earth's surface.
Strictly speaking, we talk about LEO or low Earth orbit between 200 kilometers above the Earth's surface up to 2,000 kilometers.
That's where you see the Earth, and a very thin atmosphere, you can hardly see it, but a really, beautiful view.
When the Sun is above the horizon the background of the sky is completely black. 
You don't see the stars or the planet.
And on low Earth orbit you go typically around the Earth in about an hour and a half.
A little more for Hubble, which is at 600 kilometers which takes about 1 hour 35 minutes to go around the Earth, but roughly an hour and a half.
Now, how low can you go on an orbit?
That's an interesting question.
Although the definition of space is that it starts at 100 kilometers above the Earth's surface, this is the so called Kármán line, it's really the line of separation between the aeronautics and astronautics.
Below that it's aeronautics and above that is astronautics.
In fact, it has been determined that at that altitude of 100 kilometers you would have to go so fast in order to have enough lift for an aircraft, that you would reach orbital speed.
So that's why we have this definition of space being everything above 100 kilometers.
But there's no way to have an orbit orbiting the Earth for any length of time at 100 kilometers.
You have to be at least at 200, 250, 300 kilometers in order to sustain the orbit for several days or several weeks, because of the residual atmosphere even at these altitudes you would have too much breaking below, let's say, 200 kilometers.
Typically the Shuttle was flying at 300 kilometers, except if it was needed to go higher, like visits to Hubble were at 600 kilometers, because that's where the telescope was located, and still is located.
Low Earth orbits, many missions, again, in this part of space.
Obviously for human space flight everything happened here except in the Apollo program where they went to the Moon in the '60s.
Medium Earth orbit.
If you are above 2,000 kilometers then you enter the region of a medium Earth orbit.
Here you have a depiction, an artist's depiction, of a Galileo satellite.
This is the European global positioning system or precise navigation system set up by the European Space Agency and the European Union.
Right now the system is not quite operational, but it will be in a few years from now.
Typically, all of the navigation satellite, whether they are GPS, the US GPS, or the Galileo system in preparation, or the Chinese, or the Indian, or the Russian system, the GLONASS system, they are all at an altitude of about 20,000 kilometers above the Earth's surface, or 26,000 kilometers to the center of the Earth, in order to give them a period of revolution around the Earth of roughly 12 hours, or half a sidereal day.
So this is a medium Earth orbit.
A little higher we have a very important orbit which is or orbits in the plural, which are the geosynchronous orbits, orbits which are covered by the satellite or the spacecraft at the same time that it takes the Earth to rotate around itself with respect to the stars, or with respect to inertial space.
So geosynchronous orbit is at 36,000 kilometers above the Earth's surface or 42,000 kilometers to the Earth's center.
And if, in addition to being geosynchronous, you are over the equator on a circular orbit, then it's geostationary, which means that the satellite will always remain in the same part of the sky seen from a location on the Earth.
Nearly all communication satellites are located on geostationary orbits because you can have an antenna in order to communicate from one continent to another for instance, which is absolutely fixed.
You don't have to do any tracking of the antenna.
So it's much simpler, technically speaking, to have geostationary orbits, again, 36,000 kilometers above the Earth's surface, on the equator in circular orbit.
You don't have much above the geostationary orbits and all the way to the Moon.
It's not an area that is covered much by satellites or spacecraft.
But obviously the Moon was an interesting target for spacecraft at the beginning of the space exploration time which started as you know, with Sputnik in 1957.
Already in 1959, we had the first Soviet probes:
Luna 2, Luna 3, that were sent to the Moon in 1959.
Luna 3 even took pictures of the far side of the Moon which was quite interesting because it was the first time that we had the possibility of seeing what has always been invisible for humanity, because the Moon always has one its sides hidden from us, because it has the same period of revolution on itself of the period of the time it takes to go around the Earth.
Of course, the glory of the exploration of the Moon was the Apollo program started in the early '60s.
Apollo 8 was the first mission that went around the Moon.
That was in December, 1968.
And then Apollo 10 went also around the Moon
Rehearsal for the first landing on the Moon, which was in July, 1969.
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walked on the Moon, and this very successful mission was followed by six more landings on the Moon until 1972, Apollo 17 and that's a picture taken on Apollo 17 where we had Harrison Schmitt, a geologist, astronaut, close to a very big boulder, on the third spacewalk of Apollo 17.
So a very remarkable program.
And we'll talk a little bit about trajectories to the Moon and the strategy of the Apollo program to reach the Moon and land on the precise point on the surface of our satellite.
Solar system exploration: again, this is going to be a pretty important section in this course.
This started also quite early in the space program.
I mentioned already the exploration of the Moon with the Luna spacecraft
But we had Venera 4 in 1965, that went all the way to Venus.
A few years later, in 1975, we had the landing of Viking 1 and Viking 2,
US spacecraft that landed on the surface of the red planet.
So, early in the space program we explored the solar system with landers or with probes.
This has been an extremely successful program over the past years.
We have explored all of the planets of the solar system: Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.
Even Pluto recently with a New Horizons that made a flyby of Pluto and took remarkable pictures of Pluto itself, and its five satellites.
This picture was taken by the Cassini spacecraft on orbit around Saturn for the last 10 years or so, and it's quite a remarkable picture, because you see the globe of Saturn on the upper left of the picture.
You see of course, the rings of this magnificent planet including a ring that is not visible from Earth and has been detected by Cassini.
And you have this object here with an arrow, a very faint object, this is the Earth seen from Saturn at the distance of one light hour.
So again, this is quite an achievement to be able to control a spacecraft and direct its cameras towards satellite that are recorded in great detail at the distance of one light hour from us.
Solar System Exploration.
This is a big subject and we had also a very successful flyby and exploration of a comet,
Churyumov–Gerasimenko by the Rosetta spacecraft starting in 2014, continued in 2015, and it's still going on now in 2016.
