This is a nice medieval drawing showing one of the very important aspects of why we go into space.
We see this gentleman who is going through the celestial sphere and he is looking at the mechanism that can explain the motion of planets and stars.
This is really the spirit of space exploration.
We go there because it gives us   a vantage point to much better understand celestial object.
The Hubble Space Telescope is a good example.
We put that telescope in space because it gives us a much better, much more precise view of the universe, and if we observe the sky from the ground, with ground base telescopes.
So exploration and satisfaction about curiosity about the world.
One other very important aspect of space exploration is looking at the Earth itself.
We want to understand planet Earth.
That’s where life has developed since billions of years, and hopefully is going to be a habitat for living creatures, including humans, for a long time in the future.
We want to understand the Earth.
A lot of the space missions have their instruments directed towards the Earth.
There is even a program at NASA called <i>Mission to Planet Earth</i>.
Is a space mission but looking at planet Earth.
We want to understand our neighbors here.
You see here an old map of the Earth.
Obviously if we observe the Earth from space, we can, because we see it globally, we can have a very good idea about the distribution of land masses, and the quality of land masses.
And we can use it for much better exploiting the resources of planet Earth.
Here you have an old map of the planet Mars.
Since the beginning of the space age, where we’ve explored our neighbors were we’ve explored the Moon, we’ve gone to Mars also with various spaceships.
Exploring our neighbors, understanding our neighbors, and doing so-called comparative planetology, will help us better understand the Earth.
Understanding Venus, understanding Mars will help us better understand the Earth and using the Earth in the future.
Now we go into space also, and install all kinds of spacecraft for practical purposes, and the main practical applications of space, are obviously telecommunication, precise navigation, like the GPS system, with the equivalent system in Europe, in Russia, in China, and more to come.
We also have the observation of the Earth to better utilize its resources, and observation of the weather systems.
This is a good example here.
This is a pretty bad hurricane in 2005, Katrina, which is one of the strongest hurricanes to enter the Gulf of Mexico, and did a lot of damage in New Orleans, which is about located here, and this is the eye of this hurricane.
So, we can, on one hand, much better understand hurricane path and processes, and we can also order evacuations on time, in order to prevent loss of life or loss of properties on Earth.
So the practical aspect of space,
I wouldn’t say exploration, but utilization, is quite important.
Last but not least, we have a lot of spin-off from the space program.
The Apollo program is a good example.
This is Apollo 11 with the astronaut 
Aldrin close to the lunar module, and on the side of Aldrin we have one experiment, a Swiss experiment that had as an objective to capture the particles of the solar wind.
There are a lot of spin-offs in the sense that we develop technology.
It’s a very harsh environment, it’s very challenging.
We have to develop systems that are very reliable, that function well, including in very difficult conditions, with solar radiation, with ultraviolet, with cosmic rays.
It's very challenging, so it’s pushing the technology, and these progresses in technology can be then used on the Earth, and this is a spin-off, and numerous spin-offs in materials, in electronics system, and reliable MEMS component.
This is a huge side benefit of human and automatic space exploration.
