Space utilization.
There are really three main fields of space utilization on one hand, for communication, whether it's for telephone or voice in general, or high-speed internet, or TV signals, from one country to another in the same continent, or from one continent to another.
This is a very important aspect of space utlilization.
We have precise navigation, with several systems in several countries providing very precise navigation, typically of the order of a few meters.
And the last important utilization is for observation of the Earth's surface, in the service of geology, forestry, cartography, or land use in general.
And of course the observation of the Earth's atmosphere, of the weather systems, whether it's for predicting changes in climate long-term, or whether it's for short-term weather forecasts.
Communication, with a number of commercial satellites used for telecommunication.
Inmarsat is an important system that originally - this was in the late '70s - was used specifically for maritime communication, hence the name.
Later, it was expanded to cover also aeronautical communication.
Typically, when you cross an ocean, you don't have direct contact on VHF with a ground station, then you can use Inmarsat for communciaton with air traffic control.
It was also expanded to cover internet and other communication services.
At this point, we have about 15
Inmarsat satellites on orbit.
Another aspect of telecommunications is Iridium.
Iridum is a set of satellites, about 66 satellites, on low Earth orbit, that are used for telephone communications.
So, not as wide use as Inmarsat, but it's used typically for cell phone telecommunication.
ViaSat is an important satellite wtih a very high rate of about 140 gigabits per second, and it's used for high-speed internet.
Very used now, systematically used, for high-speed internet, including in airplanes.
If you have a trans-atlantic flight and you are in a modern airliner where you have internet, it's provided by ViaSat.
Small countries also have communication means with space platforms.
For instance, Nigcomsat is serving the communication needs of Nigeria.
The satellite was built in China and launched by a Chinese launcher.
And you have other examples like Venesat 1, which is serving the communication needs of the Venezuela country.
Data relay satellites.
These are satellites with a high data rate, that are used by agencies space agencies, like NASA for TDRS, and ESA for the EDRS,
European Data Relay Satellite.
The TDRS was used in a significant manner during the Shuttle program.
At that time, there were only two TDRS, the TDRS East and TDRS West.
And in its orbit, low Earth orbit around the Earth, the Shuttle had either a view of one of them or the other one, or possibly both at the same time, and there was in fact, both of these satellites were above the horizon for the ground station in White Sands, in the middle of the United States.
They had a certain elevation over White Sands, so there was a small region opposite White Sands - it was over the Indian Ocean - where there was a loss of signal, where the Shuttle didn't have the view of either one of these two communication satellites, TDRS satellites.
But, most of the time,
I would say 95% of the time, there was possibility of communicating between the Shuttle and mission control center in Houston via TDRS, either S band, or Ku band for the TV signals.
Then, White Sands receiving station, and then the signal was communicated to or from 
Mission Control Center in Houston.
TDRS, since the Shuttle was retired, has been used widely for ISS, the International Space Station communication from the US segment to the ground, and also for Hubble.
The signal from Hubble, whether it's commanding Hubble or receiving the scientific data from Hubble, this is via TDRS, and also Landsat has been using TDRS.
European Data Relay Satellite is a recent baby in fact, the first one is being launched at this time, at the beginning of 2016.
And the idea is to provide similar services as TDRS, but for the European communication needs.
What is interesting is that the link between the satellite that provides data to the ground, to the EDRS, is a laser link, which is a new technology.
And then, the signal from EDRS to the ground station in Europe is via standard Ka or Ku band.
Precise navigation is obviously a very important application of space.
Basically, the principle is the following:
If you have two satellites visible from one given location, and they send signals related to their exact position, and precise time signals, with a <i>Δt</i>, a <i>Δt1</i> for the first satellite,
<i>Δt2</i> for the second satellite, and <i>Δt3</i> for the third satellite, the location from the first satellite point of view is on a circle on the surface of the Earth.
The same for the second satellite, same for the third, and the intersection of these three circles is your position.
The constellation of communication satellites is typically - this is the case for US GPS and also for the European Galileo - you have six different orbits, with four satellites well-spread over these orbits for a grand total of 24 satellites.
So, you have the US GPS in operation since many years already, providing a few meters of accuracy, typically of the order of four meters.
You have an artist's view of the Galileo system, which is set up by the European
Space Agency and the European Union, a few satellites are already on orbit, and their constellation of about 30 satellites, 
24 needed, plus a few spares, will be completed in 2019.
You have other countries that also have satellite navigation systems.
Russia has the GLONASS system, which is operational.
And we have also the Beidou system in China, and IRNSS in India.
Observation of the Earth and its atmosphere, obviously a very important application of space also, since quite a while already.
Landsat was an important such satellite.
At this time we have Landsat 8, the last one of this family of Earth observation satellite.
You see here in picture, a picture of Lake Poopó, which is in Bolivia, south of La Paz between La Paz and Salar de Uyuni.
And from year to year, this lake is becoming dryer and dryer, and is slowly transforming itself into a salt lake, and obviously it's interesting to monitor this from space and take measures if needed.
You have another important
Earth observation satellite, which is Blackbridge satellite.
In fact, we have a constellation of five such satellites, providing very high-resolution pictures of the Earth about five meters resolution.
This is an island,
Onekotan Island in Russia, just south of the Kamchatka peninsula.
Last but not least, observation of weather systems again, for climate change and weather forecasts.
This is a view of Europe and North Africa, from Meteosat.
There was a whole family of Meteosat satellites since many, many years.
Right now, we have the third generation of Meteosats, giving us a view of course, it's somewhat of a slant view of Europe, because it's on a geostationary orbit over the Equator,
36,000 kilometers from the Earth's surface.
And you see Europe through a slight angle, but it's good enough to do a good weather forecast on the basis of these pictures, which are taken in various wavelength ranges, from about 0.6 micron, which is the middle of the visible range, all the way to about 11 microns in the so-called thermal infrared.
So you can have really a 3-D view of the cloud layers over Europe and you can make really good weather forecasts now, compared to what we were able to do a few decades ago.
