Solar system exploration using rovers or robots, landers and orbiters started relatively early in the space program by the United States and by the Soviet Union.
Already in the '60s, the early '60s, we had the first attempt of flybys of our neighbors,
Mars and Venus, by spacecraft of both nations.
There was partial success there; not all the mission was successful, but, still, got some early data.
In 1970, we had Venera 7 that landed on the surface of Venus without transmitting pictures or data, but at least it landed there.
1971, Mariner 9 from NASA was the first mass orbiter.
We had very successful Viking 1 and Viking 2 Mars landers in 1975, sending pictures of the Red Planet quite successfully.
1982, we had Venera 13 and 14 from the Soviet Union that landed on the surface of the Venus and transmitted the first pictures of the surface, and you see pictures from Venera 13 on the bottom of the screen.
Mars orbiters, quite a bit later, we had Mars Express of ESA and the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter -
MRO, from NASA, the droid deployed in the direction of the Red Planet
to launch in 2003 and 2005, respectively.
And we had really breathtaking high resolution pictures of Mars and of Phobos obtained by both spacecrafts.
So MRO detected ice and traces of methane which are possible conditions for life on Mars.
And even there was a detection by MRO of flowing, salty water on Mars in September 2015.
In the bottom, you have pictures taken by MRO and Mars Express.
Bottom left, you have a really nice picture of the Victoria Crater with some sand dunes in the bottom, and at the time this picture was taken, we had the Opportunity Rover, also a NASA rover, on the upper left side of the rim of the crater that also took nice pictures of this set of dunes at the bottom of that crater.
In the middle low, low parts of the screen, you have a nice picture of Mars Express, taken by Mars Express.
You see clearly that there was flowing water or liquid water on the surface of Mars in the past because these are dried lake beds.
On the righthand side, nice picture of Phobos, one of two satellites of Mars, taken by Mars Express, and you see interesting morphology with craters and with ridges and lines on the surface which are not completely understood.
Really interesting picture.
Curiosity is the last of the Mars rovers,
NASA projects commanded and controlled from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California.
You see a picture of the rover on the lefthand side and on the right, you have the landing point on the surface of Mars.
And then the track that the rover followed came commanded from the ground station in California.
Until the end of 2015, it had covered about ten kilometers of the surface of the Red Planet.
The purpose of Curiosity was really to analyze the materials of the Martian surface and detect if there were conditions in the past that would have allowed the development of life.
Exomars is a cooperation between the European Space Agency and ROSCOSMOS from Russia, the idea being to study Mars with several spacecraft.
The first was a combination of an orbiter, the so-called "trace gas orbiter", with the objective to detect the gases in the atmosphere of Mars and the chemical composition of the atmosphere of Mars.
And the other component in this first section was a lander, so called Schiaparelli, and the launch was the beginning of 2016 and the arrival at the Red Planet was in October 2016.
The insertion of the trace-gas orbiter on orbit around Mars was successful, but Schiaparelli, the lander, impacted the surface of Mars at too-high velocity and was not heard from since that time.
So it's not a success for the lander, but it was definitely a success for the orbiter
The next part of the Exomars project should be launched in 2018 and we should have a pretty large rover that will especially study the subsurface of Mars with a drill or driller that will perform holes on the surface of Mars and go pretty deep under the surface to try to detect the presence of ice.
India went to the moon and Mars, also, and successfully so.
We have on the left-hand side
Chandrayaan, which is the first lunar mission launched by India.
You see the several orbits around the earth before an ejection into a trajectory to take it to the moon and several orbits around the moon for scientific study of our satellite and there was cooperation of several nations
European nations, and the US in this project.
On the right-hand side, you have Mangalyaan, which is the first Indian mission to Mars, departing 2013.
Again, several orbits around the earth before an ejection to a haliocentric trajectory that took it to Mars and insertion into Mars orbit in September 2014.
The mission was terminated from a scientific investigation point of view in October 2016.
The Chinese went to the moon with a lander and a rover.
The lander Chang'e 3 that deployed the little rover which we see here.
For scientific investigation of the moon, there was no plan to bring samples of the moon back to earth.
This is going to be a follow-on of the project, at least to do a scientific investigation of the moon's surface.
It is also a technical demonstrator for the Chinese, quite successful.
You see the Yutu rover here that had a hard time during the first night on the moon because the night on the moon lasts fourteen times, twenty-four hours, and it is very cold and the Yutu rover suffered a little bit from this first very cold night and was unable to move at the end of this night, but since that time it has recovered again.
Cassini-Huygens.
Cassini is the NASA component,
Huygens the ESA component. launched in 1997, and after several fly-bys, arrived in 2004 in the vicinity of Saturn.
The plan was really to study the ringed planet, pretty large planet about eight times the size of the earth to study the rings and several of the satellites of Saturn, which are really interesting.
We have the largest of these satellites, Titan, that was especially studied by Huygens, the ESA component.
I'll talk about it in a minute.
And you see on the right-hand side, one of the really interesting satellites of Saturn - Enceladus, which is covered by ice pretty much like Europa, one of the satellites of Jupiter, and under the layer of ice is an ocean, so there could have been, or there may be now, development of life in the sub-surface of Enceladus, as well as Europa, one of the satellites of Jupiter.
The ESA component, Huygens, is a small spacecraft, a small lander, was deployed from Cassini, because they had performed a mission jointly at that time.
At the end of 2004,
Huygens landed softly on the surface of Titan, which is an atmosphere.
You see the parachute allowing the braking of the motion of Huygens as it gets close to the surface.
It didn't last a long time because of the conditions of the surface of Titan were quite tough from a chemical point of view and temperature point of view, and the lifetime of Huygens on the surface was short, but still it was able to transmit some pictures, like the one you see on the right hand side.
Quite a spectacular result.
It was the first time that there was a landing on an object of the solar system other than the surface of Venus or of Mars, this time on the satellite of the faraway planet Saturn.
Hayabusa was quite a successful, ambitious project of Japan - to land a spacecraft on the surface of an asteroid, the Itokawa asteroid and the landing took place in 2005 after a launch in 2003.
The idea was to land softly on the surface of the asteroid and take samples and bring them back to Earth which was successful.
Quite an ambitious project and very successfully accomplished by the Japanese space agency, with a follow-on which is Hayabusa 2, which has been launched in 2014, has not accomplished its mission yet, but we expect again great results from Hayabusa 2.
Quite an interesting mission and a really interesting result because if we can get samples from objects in the solar system like asteroids, we can much better understand the whole history of the solar system.
So from a scientific point of view, it's quite an achievement.
Rosetta was a ESA mission to a comet.
The launch was in March 2004 with the Arianna 5 rocket from French Guiana.
The trip to the comets lasted ten years.
The comet that was chosen as a target was the comet
Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
These are the names of the two discoverers of the comet from Ukraine.
The comet was chosen because the orbiter (INAUDIBLE) were proper in terms of the energy needed and the time needed, and it was also a good target.
You see a very nice picture of the comets.
On the left-side, the comet, at that time, was relatively close to the sun, and you see already the out-gassing of the substance on the surface of the comet creating the tail, which is visible sometimes with the naked eye, with binoculars, or with a telescope.
The object is about five kilometers in size.
It's a bi-lobed object, pretty much like a bone.
The shape was very unexpected.
And when the rendezvous took place, ten years after the lift-off, of the launcher from French Guiana in 2014, it was a big surprise to see the shape of the comets and Rosetta came on orbit, a very slow orbit, because of the low gravity of the comet and, at some point, it was in November 2014, a few months after the encounter, a lander named Philae was detached from Rosetta.
You see this on the right-hand side.
It approached the surface of the comet, and it was equipped with grippers that were supposed
 to attach it to the surface.
Unfortunately, it didn't work and Philae bounced a couple of times and nestled itself in a ridge which was in the shadows, so the lifetime of the lander was, unfortunately, relatively short.
The mission was terminated sometime after the passing of the perihelion.
We know in August 2015, when we had the largest amount of out-gassing for the comet, obviously.
Philae was found again in September 2016 with a high-resolution camera from Rosetta.
It was found in that ridge in the shadow and it was understood at that time why we had no more signal from the lander after a short while following the first impact on the surface of the comet.
And the mission was terminated in September 2016, shortly after finding the location of Philae with a planned impact of Rosetta on the surface of the comet.
Dawn was a NASA mission, too, as well, an asteroid Vesta
 and to a dwarf planet Ceres.
The launch was in 2007, and this is the initial trajectory of the Dawn spacecraft.
There was a mass gravity boost or gravity-assist or fly-by in February 2009.
Then we had a new trajectory with a somewhat high-energy, allowing an arrival at Vesta, which is in the asteroid  belt between Mars and Jupiter, in July 2011.
Then, we had a formation flying, if I can say, of Dawn and Vesta for a few months, until September 2012.
At this point here, Vesta was ejected on a trajectory taking it to an arrival at dwarf planet Ceres in March 2015.
And then there was a formation flying.
We can say orbits, but it was more formation flight because of the low gravity of Ceres, the same for the low gravity of Vesta, or the low gravity of comet 
Churyumov-Gerasimenko from Rosetta.
And then there was a tracking of Ceres for several months until this point here, and you see on the right-hand side a very interesting picture of Ceres with two bright objects on the surface which are not quite understood, but we learn a lot of things on such missions, but there are also a lot of new questions that are coming out.
Solar system exploration in general is a very fruitful field and it's extremely interesting.
It's the opportunity to provide huge advances
for the astronomical community about objects in the solar system by visits in situ these various objects whether they are planets or satellites or asteroids or comets or dwarf planets like Ceres.
