Hello everyone!
Welcome to space science and unmanned exploration and, particularly, astrophysics and solar observations.
We start with the Hubble Space Telescope, the jewel of the space observatories a real discovery machine that was launched in 1990, so a little more than 25 years ago, and has been an extraordinary instrument for new discoveries in astronomy, very much liked by the public also because of the beauty of the pictures that it's sending every week to us.
It was deployed from the Space Shuttle in April, 1990, on a 600-kilometer high orbit and the plan was to visit it on a regular basis, to do servicing missions to either do repair work if needed, maintenance, or to change the scientific instrument or the focus of the telescope.
We had a grand total of five servicing missions, the first one in 1993, when we had to install optical corrector.
We had an optical problem with the primary mirror that didn't really have the proper shape.
And four more servicing missions after that, until 2009, when the last one was performed.
The telescope is in good shape, it still is a very productive scientific instrument, it should still last for several years before its successor takes over.
I had the privilege of space walking on Hubble in December 1999, more precisely, on the 23rd of December, 1999, on the second spacewalk of a shuttle mission STS-103, and the spacewalk was an eight hours and ten minute exercise that together with Mike Foale, who is a subject of a Focus on astronaut prespective, so give a nice hand to Mike Foale when you see him on the Focus and remember we spacewalked together on this magnificent instrument, we changed the primary computer of Hubble, we changed one of the fine guidance sensors and did some other maintenance work on the telescope.
Wonderful memories, 
Hubble Space Telescope, a jewel in the sky.
The Hubble Space Telescope has a very high resolution; it's about one twentieth of an arc second resolution, so we can get very precise, fine pictures of celestial objects.
In the background here, you have the Hubble Ultra Deep Field which is one of the major results obtained by Hubble with the advanced camera for surveys.
Recently, originally we had the so-called
Hubble Deep Field in 1994, shortly after the first servicing mission of the telescope.
The telescope was used mainly to do the Deep Field, as mentioned already, two major Deep Fields; and one Southern deep field also.
There was a proof that a quasar resides in galaxies and also black holes; expansion of the universe was measured, and there were a lot of studies of star formation in nebulae in our galaxy that were observed in great detail to see how stars formed by condensation of the interstellar matter out of these clouds of gas and dust in our galaxy.
Also, planetary nebulae, which are the last stages of the life of massive stars that expand and reject a lot of gas in their vicinity and produce really beautiful objects that are named planetary nebulae.
This is the planned successor to Hubble, and it should be launched in 2018, a product of cooperation between NASA, the European Space Agency, and the Canadian Space Agency.
In the upper right you see the size of the segmented mirror of the James Webb Space Telescope.
Of course, it's folded when it's launched.
It will be launched on Ariane 5, launched from Kourou, French Guiana, part of the contribution of the European Space Agency.
Then, it will be deployed when it gets on station on the Lagrange point, L2, and you see the comparison, the size of the primary mirror compared to the Hubble primary mirror.
So, of course, we collect much more energy, we can see objects that are very faint, and it will be working in the infrared part of the spectrum also.
On the left hand side you see the telescope itself,
It's an open telescope, it has a large shield that will protect it from the radiation from the Sun, from the Earth and from the Moon, and it's going to be a very cold object it will observe, as mentioned, in the infrared, so its detectors will be cooled, and it's good to have it in such situation where is totally protected from an warm object like the Sun, the Earth and the Moon.
Herschel and Planck are two ESA,
European Space Agency space observatories that were both launched in 2009,
Herschel lived until 2013, and Planck until 2012.
In fact, they are working in the far infrared, respectively, microwave region of the spectrum for Planck; and they need cooling after a few years only.
We have no more coolants, so it's the end of the operational life of the telescope.
These two were located on the so-called
L2 Lagrange point of the Sun-Earth system.
You see a drawing on the left hand side with the Sun, the Earth about 150,000,000 km away from the Sun and the L2 Lagrange point is about
1.5 million km from the Earth in the anti-Sun direction and both of these telescopes were on so-called halo orbits around the L2 Lagrange point.
We will come back to these L2 and also L1 Lagrange points later in the course.
Both telescopes were very successful.
Herschel was studying very cold objects and the formation of planetary systems around stars.
Planck was looking at really dark matter and very cold objects in the universe.
Spitzer and XMM, respectively an infrared telescope and x-ray telescope
NASA observatories.
In fact, Spitzer, XMM, and Hubble are three of the so-called great observatories of NASA observing respectively, in the infrared,
Hubble is more in the visible, and near infrared and near ultraviolet, and of course, XMM is looking at very short wavelength in the x-ray part of the spectrum.
And many objects had been studied by all three great observatories to have a view of these objects in a broad wavelength range from x-rays all the way to far infrared.
Gaia is an ESA spacecraft also an ESA project.
It's on orbit at the current time, it's doing extremely precise measurements of the position and proper motion of about one billion stars in our galaxy.
It follows the Hipparcos program which was doing the same thing a few years ago, but with less accuracy, so it's also a telescope that has as its objective to do measurements in the sky, it's an astronomy satellite, but not so much for pretty pictures like the other telescope
I talked about before, but much more for a very determination, very precisely of the geometry of our nearby universe around the Sun.
LISA Pathfinder is an ESA spacecraft launched in late 2015, that is a precursor to LISA that has as its objective to detect gravitational waves from faraway objects, whenever you have massive objects relatively nearby or far away universe, that generate gravitational waves that so far, have never been detected, so LISA Pathfinder is there to develop the technologies to later use them on LISA to detect these gravitational waves.
SOHO solar and heliospheric observatory is an ESA/NASA spacecraft that has been very successful in the observation of the Sun located on the L1 Lagrange point of the Sun-Earth system so between the Earth and the Sun, but much closer to the Earth than the Sun, about 1.5 million km from the Earth in the Sun direction.
It follows the Earth in its orbit around the Sun all year long, and it has, of course, an unprecedented view of the Sun in a wide range of the wavelengths because you don't have the atmosphere absorbing the very short wavelength in the infrared.
It mainly observed the Sun in the extreme ultraviolet and x-ray because you can detect the very active portion to the Sun atmosphere in these wavelengths, and also it was equipped, or still is equipped, with a coronograph in order to detect outer layers of the Sun atmosphere, and also the burst of energy, the solar mass, coronal mass ejections that produce reflexive particles in the solar system that reach the Earth and produce in fact disturbances in the Earth's atmosphere and also for satellites.
A very successful program: it lasted much longer than anticipated, it was planned to be used for about five years, now it's more than 20 years, and it still is active.
Solar Dynamics Observatory is, in a way, a follower of SOHO, which, at some point will die, will be no longer useful, and it's a NASA spacecraft, and it has a much higher resolution than SOHO.
And unlike SOHO, it is not on the L1 Lagrange point, but it is on a geo-synchronous orbit about 28.5 degrees inclination with respect to the equator, it's constantly visible from the US, and it can radiate all the data to the ground station in White Sands, New Mexico.
As it has a very high resolution, it sends at a very high data rate of precise observations of the dynamics of the solar photosphere and chromosphere to the ground station.
A very successful instrument to detect in great detail the activity of the Sun.
Last but not least, we have a very successful astronomy and solar observation program from space from India.
The Astrosat, we see it here; in the preparation phase in a clean room prior to its launch which was in 2015, so quite recently.
It's deployed on an equatorial orbit
650 km altitude and is recording very interesting data, again, in wavelength regions that are not accessible from the ground in the ultraviolet and the x-rays, and it serves very well the scientific community and the astrophysicists in India.
Adytia 1 will be launched in 2019 or 2020 and is pretty much the same type of instrument or satellite, a scientific facility as SOHO and Solar Dynamics Observatory to observe the Sun in the wavelength region not accessible from the ground, mainly extreme ultraviolet and x-rays.
