Let's talk about launchers.
In this video, there is a great variety of launchers of different size, capacity, shapes, in the different countries that have that capability, and we'll try to mention all or at least most of the launchers which are currently used in these countries.
Let's start with the European launchers.
All are launched from Kourou, French Guiana, which is a European spaceport.
Let's start from the right, we have the Ariane 5 ECA, which is the last version of the Ariane launcher family, built by Airbus and exploited by Arianespace.
Ariane 5 ECA is the most powerful of the Ariane 5 launchers.
It has a cryogenic upper stage, which gives it a somewhat higher capability than the standard Ariane 5, which you see here.
There is a cryogenic middle stage: cryogenic means it's liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen in the big central segment, and one single cryogenic rocket engine at the bottom, and two solid rocket boosters, pretty much like the Space Shuttle, which are separated after about two minutes and fall down in the ocean.
Now, you see the Soyuz here, which is not, obviously, a European launcher, it's a Russian launcher, but there is an agreement between ESA, and CNES, and Roscosmos to operate Soyuz from French Guiana.
There are some advantages, because being close to the equator, you are in a better position for a launch into the geostationary, or geosynchronous orbits.
Soyuz, since a few years, is operated from Kourou, and this is for a somewhat lower capacity in terms of mass of the spacecraft, and Ariane 5.
Typically the Galileo precise navigation European satellites are launched using Soyuz from Kourou.
And for the smaller payloads, you have the Vega spacecraft here, a relatively recent development by the European aerospace industry for small satellites.
All of these space vehicles have a further development in the future.
Beyond Ariane 5, we'll have Ariane 6, which has been decided by the European Space Agency recently which will be developed over the next few years and Vega will also be developed into further versions.
Russian launchers:
You will obviously have the whole family of the Soyuz launchers.
Here you have Soyuz ISS Cargo to send Progress into the International Space Station.
You have the Soyuz ISS Manned, the Soyuz spacecraft for three crew members sent to ISS.
At the current time, this is the only way to send people to ISS and back to the Earth from ISS.
And these two versions of Soyuz are the commercial Soyuz for launch of satellites.
We have the Zenit launcher which is produced in Ukraine, by Yuzhnoye, in Ukraine, and is mainly launched from sea platforms with the advantage of being able to locate the sea platform close to the equator, also for more efficient access to the geostationary orbit.
And last, but not least, for the large payload, the Russians are operating Proton from Baikonur in Kazakhstan.
These are the mostly used current US launchers:
Delta II, on the left-hand side, for relatively small payloads, and the heavy launchers are really
Delta IV and the Atlas 5.
You have the Space Shuttle on the far right.
Obviously, the Shuttle is no longer used but it's just a comparison of the size: all about the same size, about 50-70 meters high.
And the US is equipped with a set of very powerful and reliable launchers.
Some of these will be used for the launch of commercial capsules either carrying freight or personnel to the International Space Station in the future.
Chinese launchers: these are 3 members of the Long March family, used to launch satellites, but also used to send people into space; with the Shenzhou spacecraft; all the Shenzhou,
Shenzhou 8, 9, and 10, were using one of the members of the family of Long March.
Also, the Tiangong space station was launched using Long March.
Indian launchers:
ISRO and the aerospace industry in India have developed their own set of launchers for their use, and mainly, you have the so-called PSLV,
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle, and GSLV, geosynchronous, or geostationary satellite launch vehicle.
And there is a more powerful version of the GSLV that has been developed recently, the GSLV Mark 3, and you see, in the middle of the picture, the launch from Satish Dhawan, which is the standard Indian launch site, north of Chennai, on the east coast of India, toward the Gulf of Bengal.
Now, all of their needs are satisfied with their own launches in India, either commercial satellite or utilitarian satellite for either Earth observation or navigation, or communication.
And also, all of the science programs, like Chandrayaan and Mangalyaan were deployed using the autonomous Indian launchers.
The Japanese also are mainly using their launchers for access to space, whether it's for commercial satellites or for scientific purposes or also for the HTV, for deploying the resupply vehicle to the International Space Station from Japan, and they have their family of H-II launchers that are launched from Tanegashima, from a small island in the south part of Japan.
This is a comparison of selected launchers.
What is interesting are the capacity, the last two columns on the right-hand side, capacity to LEO the low-Earth orbits and capacity to GTO, which is geosynchronous transfer orbit.
Whenever you want to go to the geosynchronous orbit, you have to go first to a transfer orbit from the low-Earth orbit to the geosynchronous orbit; and whenever you want to launch a communication satellite the capacity of a launcher into GTO is a very important parameter.
You see that for LEO, the highest capacity launchers can carry a little more than 20 tons into low-Earth orbit, and the capacity to GTO is of the order of ten times or a little bit beyond that for the Delta IV.
Now, since a few years, private companies are also providing launch services for commercial customers or for NASA, or resupply to the International Space Station for freights; this has been done, so far successfully, by some companies, and in the future, for personnel.
There will be a possibility from probably 2017 to bring personnel, astronauts and cosmonauts to the International Space Station from US soil, using these commercial launch system and capsules.
Now, on the far left, we have SpaceX, quite a successful and active company, providing the Falcon 9 launcher.
And the two versions on the right-hand side here are for commercial purposes to launch satellites of various sizes and weights.
And on the left-hand side you have Falcon 9 with the Dragon capsule resupply of freight to the International Space Station, successfully accomplished a few times in the last few years.
And in the future, again, from 2017 on, we'll have a manned version of the Dragon capsule; the manned Dragon that will be able to supply up to 4 people at a time to the International Space Station from US soil.
Now, as far as the companies selected by NASA to resupply the International Space Station in personnel, we have two other companies that have been selected: we have Boeing, with the Boeing CST-100 capsule, and more recently we have the Dream Chaser, of Sierra Nevada Corporation, which is a winged vehicle, pretty much like the Space Shuttle that will be able to land on the runway at the completion of the mission.
So these three: Dragon from SpaceX,
Boeing CST-100 from Boeing, and Dream Chaser from
Sierra Nevada Corporation to resupply the Space Station in personnel in the future.
Now, we have Orbital Corporation which is operating the Antares rocket on the far-right side, with a Cygnus spacecraft on the top, able to resupply freight to the International Space Station.
We have had a few successful flights so far and hopefully, in the future, it will continue.
Major spaceports: I don't pretend to mention them all, but I will show the major ones in the various space-faring nations.
In the US, we have obviously
Cape Canaveral, Florida, and this is for launches in this sector, which means mainly to the east, and to the northeast.
Typically the launches to the International Space Station, with an inclination of 51.6 degrees are fine from Cape Canaveral, or Kennedy Space Center, for that matter,
Kennedy Space Center being the specific NASA launch site located at Cape Canaveral.
Now, we have a launch site in the US on the west coast, Vandenberg, and this is for the launches in this region, which means if you want to go to a polar orbit, or to a sun synchronous orbit, we'll see that later, this is close to a polar orbit, you do it from Vandenberg, and not from Cape Canaveral.
Kourou, French Guiana, which is the European spaceport, is located here.
Also has a large expanse to the east over the Atlantic Ocean, and relatively close to the equator, the Equator is here, and the latitude of Kourou is a little less than 6 degrees which is favorable for the launches with a destination geostationary orbit.
Let's go to Russia.
We have Baikonur and Plesetsk, which is far north, and in the future, we'll have the launch site located on the east side of Russia, Vostochny.
As far as Japan is concerned, we have Tanegashima, which is in the south part of Japan on a small island.
For India, we have Satish Dhawan, as mentioned already, just north of Chennai, with the Gulf of Bengal open on the east side, which is favorable for launches.
As far as China is concerned, we have several launch sites distributed over the whole country.
