Hello everyone !
This video offers to introduce the issue of transformations, both spatial and temporal, of the lifestyles in European societies for forty years and the implications these transformations have on the field of mobility.
Why focus on lifestyles in a course on mobility and urban planning?
Well for one reason ultimately very simple: it is that now, lifestyles act fully as a social differentiation.
Indeed lifestyles are not anymore, in contemporary European societies, a derivative of sociodemographic variables such as income, education or household composition.
Social success models have diversified and with them, new models of lifestyles emerged.
In terms of housing and transport, with phenomena such as dependency to the automobile and to suburbanization, transportation and more generally mobility issues have become central in the construction of lifestyles.
We define lifestyle as composition in time and space of daily activities and experiences that give meaning to the life of a person.
For us, lifestyle has three central dimensions: a functional dimension, a significant dimension and a social dimension.
I now suggest that we look together at each of these dimensions one after the other.
Let's start with the functional dimension.
The functional quality is what makes every day practical.
This therefore refers to the built environment, the types of infrastructure and equipment available in one place, in a city, in a territory as well as service and accessibility by various means of transport.
Regarding this functional dimension everyone has preferences, transport mode preferences, and is characterized by an anchor, in daily activities, more or less related to proximity.
The sensitive dimension, second dimension, refers to what promotes our wellbeing.
In the characteristics of the built environment, it refers to the morphology of the built environment: the fact whether or not they are green spaces, the quality of facilities but also the morphology of the frame and, of course, all the aesthetic features.
Compared to this sensitive dimension, each has a sensitivity and preferences, feels good in certain environments rather than others.
This is called "sensitive quality" the second dimension lifestyles.
The third dimension: social quality.
Social quality is what promotes social relations.
In regards to the built environment, it is linked to public spaces with the possibility to meet, with the presence of a number of facilities with the presence of intermediate spaces, of thresholds spaces, with the possibility of articulating the public / private division.
Compared to this dimension, we all design specific relation to each other and of the social anchor: the community life, the neighborly friendliness, the reputation, the animation of a neighborhood, all are dimensions that return to the social quality of a space and for which each has specific expectations.
What has changed in the last forty years regarding the three dimensions, is that we have a diversification of yearning models.
If, thirty years ago, the expectations of a population were relatively similar, nowadays we have aspirations highly diversified in terms of three dimensions just mentioned.
Thus one can no longer speak of quality of life but of living qualities, plural.
This is reflected in particular by the fact that for an equivalent income in the European urban population is observed very different lifestyles.
In this transformation of lifestyles at work for the last forty years, one can also see that the use of transport means is a central indicator of lifestyles and of their diversity.
Means of transport, means of travel, are a way to introduce ourselves, are a way to build one's relationship to time and a way to build one's relationship with space, and that iss why it iss important, when we look at mobility issues related to urban planning, to ask ourselves about lifestyles.
On this mapping, you can see the GPS track of a person who has been living in the center of Lausanne for ten days.
So here, all the travels and places that person has attended for ten days are represented.
The stars represent the busiest places and the lines represent the paths taken.
The bigger the star, the more frequented the place was.
The thicker the path is, the more used it has been.
As for them, the colors represent the different means of transport used.
This is an example of the representation of the lifestyle of a person who lives in the center of Lausanne.
We arrived at the end of this video which aimed to present a general and theoretical perspective of the question of the transformation of lifestyles.
We saw that in particular lifestyles have greatly diversified and that it is now impossible to identify them using the classic sociodemographic variables such as income, education or household composition.
We also have seen that the use of different means of transport is a central element of these lifestyles and, in other words, the use of certain means of transport, rather than other fundamentally refers to ways of living and organizing one's daily life and not just simply choices of means of transport.
Thank you for your attention.
