We have previously seen various types of cities.
We will now see what forms these types of cities generate.
These different forms of urbanization, these urban forms are a total of five, these are the main ones.
While there are of course subgroups, these are the five main ones that we are going to find in all of the cities in the world.
First there are slums and working-class neighborhoods, there are gated neighborhoods, the gentrified centers most of the time, the large residential suburbs and business and/or commercial areas.
We are going to quickly review these different forms of urbanization.
Here, we clearly recognize the slum or the working-class neighborhood.
We are now in Haiti, we have crossed the Atlantic to find other forms of urbanization that are exactly and totally the same as those that can be found on the African continent.
If I continue, we are now in Riyadh. in Saudi Arabia in what we call the large gated neighborhoods, that is the "gated" communities that are protected from the outside by walls and we can see that there are relatively few entrances in the neighborhood so the resident movement can be controlled by two entrances, three entrances with guards and we can clearly see that in this situation the whole of the space here is without a doubt private.
Next.
The large gentrified centers.
Here we recognize the cathedral.
We are in the center of Dakar.
The process of gentrification is relatively slow in Africa, but little by little, these centers are redeemed, whether the old houses are once again purchased and destroyed to make places for buildings, for populations that are much more well off than those who lived there previously.
The large residential centers. 
Here is a little atypical of an example, since we are in Kinshasa.
It's clear that we are not observing the formal but rather the informal but that these large suburbs disperse and the housing disperses over extremely important areas, which we call a diffuse city, we could have very well used as an example a residential neighborhood in the United States since in principle, these are images that we know best.
The last form of urbanization, last type of urban form, is the commercial center or the business center, we have combined commercial and business, it is here that jobs are found in general, and here we are typically in an industrial zone.
We see very clearly by the form of the parcels, by the size of the parcels and the size of the buildings.
As an example here, we have without a doubt neighborhoods, islands in residential neighboorhoods, we see the size of the highway and then we see that the industrial parcels here have been subsequently subdivided in large parcels, so we see these are no longer the same proportions here, without a doubt, of kerosene or of great buildings and hangars here, so without knowing exactly which are the industries in these areas, we see by the form of the area, the size of the buildings that we are in a form of business center.
Here are a few large forms of urbanization quickly described.
So there are subcategories, we can find forms that are a little different, but really they can be found in every city on the planet to which the African cities are not really an exception, it's what we find in terms of forms of urbanization.
The only drawback of being on the topic of gentrified centers since Europe is notably in a much more advanced process but we see that the process is exactly the same in the large African cities and that little by little these large cities are gentrified, that is a much richer population tries to settle and finally change the form and the face of the neighborhoods.
