We're going to take a quick look at urban professions.
These include, of course, not just city planners or surveyors, there are also lawyers, architects, engineers, land surveyors.
We'll look briefly at some of these professions.
Why?
Simply to highlight the fact that the various inputs in urban issues are not always the same, when it comes to discipline.
We should always keep this in mind.
The architect will, of course, look at urban design, as well as at the relationship between things, spatiality, while the economist will see only a vast web of interchange between people, between societies.
So ultimately the same aspect of the city will be viewed from totally different angles.
This must be kept in mind when one begins to plan.
The goal of planning is not to favor one discipline over another, but instead to integrate and articulate all of these urban professions.
In formulating my plan for the city,
I can in this way just as well focus on questions of design, on questions of economics, of flow management, engineering systems, etc., as we'll see when we continue.
First, the architecture.
We've found an old plan, as you can see, one from classical architecture.
Why are architects interested in the relationships which exist between objects.
The idea is to create a spatiality, the representation is two-dimensional, of course we represent in two dimensions a reality which is three-dimensional.
But the interest, as we've seen in the last image, is to see the relationship which is established between the different elements which make up the city.
We have here a map of land allotments.
Here too there is no explanation of its origin.
We see a certain number of parcels with, each time, let me mark it...
We can see a certain number of islets with parcels, and then for each parcel, there is a zone for the house, and a zone for a garden behind it.
This is the plan of the surveyor.
The surveyor, also known as the topographer, is fundamental.
The surveyor plays a key role in the making of a city.
It is ultimately the surveyor who, in the end, has the most impact.
There is absolutely no recognition of this fact.
There is absolutely no recognition of this power of decision-making, but it is clearly the surveyor, who subdivides, most of the time, the parcels.
It is the surveyor who, as a general rule, maps out road systems.
So the surveyor has his own particular way of making a city, but is one of the most important elements in its making.
An engineering plan.
Now we're not aware, not always aware,
We're here at ground level... the people are here
And what interests us is this zone, here, all that goes on underground.
And all that happens underground is the domain of civil engineering.
All the networks, the pipelines, electricity, drinking water systems, waste water systems, if these exist, all this happens here, underground.
So we can also imagine an entire vision of the city from the perspective of civil engineering, and its grids.
In a very symptomatic way, here, a carcass in a public space, a cow's carcass.
A few donkeys, we see the problems of waste management, the problems of the environment.
And we arrive at the role of the engineer of environmental sciences, or the environmentalist.
He plays a role of growing importance in the reflection on the city.
For a long time the poor relative, it must be said.
There are still many cities who can't even imagine that they need to call in an environmentalist, to imagine, to plan, but this is, increasingly, a key role, and is extremely important, for the safeguarding of natural environments, to show how these ecosystems can function, the role within it for animals, we can then derive from these questions of hygiene, the questions of public health.
Now, without illustration, for we've already discussed this.
We have the economists, who view themselves as a force, the market forces.
The lawyers or the notaries, all those in law professions, who, finally, have an enormous influence.
Why? Because they draft the regulations.
Because the notary is the one who delivers them, or who permits their deliverance, perhaps.
Because the notary is directly involved in, notably, land titling.
We have the surveyors, who are more involved in huge spatial mutations, who are more involved in dynamics, who explain the large movements which circulate in the city.
Finally it is the sociologists who will explain to us...
I exaggerate, of course, but each profession has its own language, and has its own code, and the sociologists will explain to us which are the social practices that we'll find in the city.
Finally there are all the others, who, directly or indirectly, play an important role in planning or in management.
A police officer has a very important role in urban management.
As far as planning, there are also related issues, we were just discussing public health, and we can find in a city, doctors, veterinarians, or health specialists.
There is a whole armada of professions which have, directly or indirectly, an influence on these issues of urban planning.
And in planning one should use these different languages, these different urban professionals, in order to propose something which is articulated within these different disciplines.
To finish up, we'll take the historian, who looks to the past but who can equally help us to understand what the past is made of, and how we can better build and plan.
