In our video we are going to see the limits of plans.
We are going to see which elements do not allow the plans to be more effective and more efficient.
There are blocking elements that we will try to identify.
We will continue with general limits that are inherent not to the making process of the plan but to the context, and finally, we will talk about the method as the success factor of urban plans.
In order to understand which levers can be used to activate or modify the tool, one has to understand the making process of an urban plan or an urban planning plan.
We will see this step by step.
The different stages of the plan.
First, the plan is an element in the development project.
It does not contain all the projects, but is one project among others.
Then, the State and fund providers, which can be the municipality but it's generally the State, decide to make a plan, un SDAU a master plan, a sketch, an outline and determine a budget to create this plan.
Next is the writing of the terms of reference, often outsourced to a private consultant, or done internally, but in theory, the terms of reference are written and are eventually the guideline of the future urban plan.
After this, calls are made for expressions of interest, where the interested organisations are asked to express their interest.
Then, a short-list is created according to the files of the companies to decide which organisations will be able to bid.
Then, the tenderer is being launched the offers are analyzed, negotiations with the best bid are made and we have different stages of the project and in the very end, the structure of the plan is checked, to see if the final product matches the terms of reference, if what was produced matches what we wanted to produce.
It means that the key stage in the making process of a plan is the writing of the terms of reference.
It is the only time where it is possible to add innovation.
If you want to innovate with the planning tools, there is only one moment in the whole process, and that's when you write the terms of reference.
After they are written, everything flows from these terms of reference.
There is no more possibility for change.
It is said that a number of consulting firms have a financial leeway and can be flexible, it is true and false at the same time, since at the end of the process, we will check if the firm or the people in charge of the urban planning have respected the specifications, also called the terms of reference.
So it is important to be aware of this, it's the only time in the process where it's possible to change something.
And when it's understood that this is the only time, it is interesting to think about how to write the terms of reference.
It's at that time that we gather to imagine how the process will be able to develop.
We have seen one possible lever for change, to be able to inflect on the tools, to change them or to add innovation to the planning tools.
We are now going to see the limits to the plans.
By limits, I want to put forth the elements which block the plan or make it useless since it is not made according to the context.
The first thing to keep in mind is that urban planning is in direct connection with the social structures of countries and cities.
First, be aware and remember that urban planning is directly linked to the political and social structures of cities.
It means that there are as many social structures as there are cities or countries.
This is the first element to take into account.
The second one is to keep in mind that are being applied to African cities only the tools which have been developped elsewhere and especially in Europe.
It is easy to see that when we are in Abidjan, we are not in Lausanne, when we are in Dakar, it's not Paris.
The idea is not to give a value judgement, but simply state that we are not dealing with the same reality.
We are not dealing with the same social realities, we are not dealing with the same political realities, there is no reason for the tool being developed to be exactly the same.
Another element - in planning, the size of cities is never taken into consideration.
Planning is different for a city with 500 thousands people and for a city with 5 million people.
The complexity is not the same, the problems, the concerns, the challenges are therefore not the same, so the answers given with the planning tools will not be the same.
Another element which largely limits the extent of our plans is that the climate is not taken into account.
It is the same planning in 
Douala, Nouakchott,
Ouagadougou, Addis Ababa, and Bamako or Kigali.
Yet the morphology and climate are extremely different.
And this must be taken into account if we want to be efficient in planning the city.
Same thing for economic issues, they are never addressed, yet urbanization has a cost.
The decisions made at the planning level have a direct impact on the local communities and national finances.
And this is never negotiated, it is never underlined and generally, planning is made like if it was totally separated from the economic system.
Finally, planning does not take social practices into account, be formal or informal, they are important and they generate spatiality, but they are also the very base of social life.
And if we don't understand these social practices, it's no use planning since we will be missing the point.
I am going to use a very simple example, real estate.
Most plans ignore the issue of real estate.
Yet we know that it's a social practice whether it be formal or informal, traditional or modern, it doesn't matter, but the real estate issue is fundamental.
If I don't take the real estate issue seriously it's useless to plan since I will be missing the point anyway, as real estate practices will be more important than my practices as planner.
To conclude and sum up the limits, this long list of limiting elements, we must realize that we never really plan the existing situation.
We plan for what we could call the average man, a man who would be neither rich, nor poor, a man who, in fact, does not exist or is in minority in African cities.
So there is an idea of an urban resident type which is modeled after a few European cities, of an average man, who would have a car, a plot of land with a detached house.
Yet in African cities, we are far from this, and in all urban world we are, in theory, very very far from this situation.
So we plan for a man who does not exist.
Not for an existing context, but for one that does not exist.
And this is all the limits of the plan, as we don't use the real social practices, we plan for an archetype which does not exist.
We ignore the climate and morphological context, the economic situation, all these things which really help planning the city.
So how to go about it?
We will see next week some recipes, some don't like this word, but I find it very appropriate to give some recipes, some very simple ones, which include the different contexts but one thing is certain, if we want to overcome all the limits, if we wan to rethink the object, the planning tool we need to reintroduce innovation in the terms of reference, and what we need is a method.
In fact, we could use almost the same method, it's a method which wants to take into account the particularities of each city.
In summary, there is no difference between physical and strategic planning, as seen in the History of Planning, we saw that innovation can only be introduced into the terms of reference, and finally, all the limiting elements showing that each city need its own plan and that it is not possible to copy paste elements between cities.
All this is brought together with the question of method.
And the method must give some rules, it means that we will make a plan, which should be done within the administration, where we have brought some external experts, as we cannot know everything in the administrations, in the large administrations and this works well, in the little ones, the number of people is insufficient.
We also need external opinions in order to mix ideas but it's necessary for the people who will manage the plan to be the same as those who created it.
The person who creates it has to take it on and manage it, and this situation only happens within administrations.
For this, we bring together a group, there is a great experiment which was done in N'Djamena a few years ago, we will show some results and we will describe in the next videos the methods that were used, but the idea behind it is to have a group that develops the plan and introduces slowly their ideas into it so they will be able in the future to defend the ideas on a daily basis, to colleagues or other partners such as public authorities, if the plan was not made within public authorities.
It is definitely the idea that there is one method allowing to come up with a plan for a city, and that this plan matches exactly in its structure and idea, the political and social structure of the city, taking the climate and else into account to overcome all said limits.
Finally, one of the criteria of our method that we will clarify later, is that it is important that all themes, subjects and problems are managed at the same level.
There is no hierarchy in themes, we have to approach all themes and issues that we will find while planning in the same way and with great respect.
