Hello.
Here, I would love to share ten basic principles while planning.
So we could give 20, we could give 50 we could give three.
I have come up with ten principles that seem obviously essential while planning.
So of course, they are not directly operational to the plan.
We cannot draw the principles like this but we must keep them in mind when we are planning.
Always keep in mind these ten principles.
And then at each stage we can reconsider our plan in the light of these principles.
Do I realize the first principle, the second?
And maybe if none of these great principles mentioned here is used in the planning, maybe we need to look again a little bit the plan which is about to be put in place.
The first principle, we put it at number one because it's important.
The importance of the pedestrian.
So this goes against everything we do generally, since we are more focused on the importance of the car.
The planning creates new roads, new highways, new intersections, one more prestigious than the other with roundabouts, sculptures, statues in the middle, but I would like to put the emphasis on the pedestrian.
The majority of people in African cities get around on foot.
If we want to make the city for the majority of people it's therefore a city for pedestrians that must be created.
So let's keep this in mind as rule #1, 
I favor the pedestrian.
We have seen it in the city models, throughout the introduction to this course that there are cities like Kuala Lumpur that are already much more advanced regarding pedestrian issues.
Why wouldn't African cities be as well one day?
So it is not well seen for some to take walks, but know that the majority of city residents go about on foot.
And it's for them that we create the city.
The second principle, we must think spatially.
This is the risk when we are dealing with strategy, we forget the spatial question.
However, the purpose of the city is a city ​​that is three-dimensional, a street that goes from here to there, that has dimensions, the plots have dimensions.
So the spatiality is very important, and we must think about the spatiality we are putting in place when we are planning.
We are not just dealing with strategy and communication, we are also dealing with physical issues, real issues, spatial issues.
The planning serving above all to organize the activities which have a spatial impact on the land.
So it is important to think about it and have this as a basic principle.
Think about spatiality.
The third principle, you must have a minimalist approach.
In all cases, the large majority of cities have limited financial resources.
We must have a a pragmatic approach but minimalist as well.
We are thankful to some infrastructures a basic structure.
Minimal structures that then allow to complete, then to develop.
But basically, we try to see what is the minimum that I can put in place to have the maximum effect and not the opposite, as we see in most cities.
Another principle is that we need efficiency in resources.
The resources are limited, we have to be efficient in their use.
In all the resources, be they financial, be they natural. be they human, we have to be careful to use these resources the most harmoniously possible.
The fifth basic principle, is that opportunities must be developed.
What we are going to do, what we are going to put in place, the planning has to be supportive of opportunities for further development.
We are not in something that is closed.
We are dealing with an open process and the process must generate a number of opportunities and that will then become jobs, that will become other things.
But we have to provide the base to open opportunities and not shut them out.
The sixth point, sixth basic principle, diversity.
We sometimes talk about mixing, we need diversity in the cities.
The idea is not to have neighborhoods with the same houses, the same people who go around in the same cars, but rather mixing and diversity, which allows the resident to have a vast choice.
Diversity in the economy allows for lowering of prices, and having the choice of many products.
When there's only one product which is on the market, we don't have a choice, we have to buy it, no matter what the price is.
Diversity allows to lower the costs but diversity allows also to liven up the city and to increase the quality of life within the cities.
The seventh principle, equal access.
They are not those who have access to the city​​, and those who have not.
It's important to give all people who have a voice when they vote, they must be given equal access to infrastructures and facilities.
This is a basic principle that must absolutely be held onto.
We see more and more cities being born from segregation, access differentiated depending on any number of criteria in the population.
We need a city open to the maximum for all of the inhabitants of this city, whomever they may be.
And this leads to the issue of diversity of people, and it is in this diversity that urban quality surfaces and with it human quality.
Look at the big cities you know.
Look at the places you love to go to, and you will see that these places are built on diversity, built on the quality of access.
Which brings us very naturally to the eight point, this quality of access as a main point, also as a basic principle.
We don't only need one access, we also need to have a quality to this access.
And this search for quality, it's the search for quality of life, quality of the urban environment.
So we have both quantitative issues, or rather, do I have access or not, and how do I have access?
And it's important, this notion of quality which is difficult to define and which we will not define here, not right away, but it's of course one of the main elements, is the quality of life of the population.
So everything we are going to put in place is to increase this quality.
The second to last principle, sustainability of the action.
Everything we plan has to be sustainable with time.
If we realize that it's not sustainable, this means that we will quickly have a problem.
So we are going to put in place a number of physical, spatialized elements.
We are going to plan, program things that have to be sustainable in time.
And finally, the principle itself, planning, it's about working on the medium and long term.
So we have said that we had to be sustainable, but we have to truly set as a principle, the work on the medium and long term, the short term being left generally to the urban management who manages the city on a daily basis.
What we are interested in is the medium and this long term, indeed, this very long term, even if in the case of the very long term, there is little chance we will get today to plan something for the next 50 years or 100 years.
So let's remain more reasonable on the 10 or 20 years to come, it's already a very faraway horizon.
The most result that we can have, is two political legislatures.
So sometimes it's eight years, sometimes it's ten, but we are dealing with, in these waters, almost a term planning, ten years.
There they are, the basic principles.
It's on these principles that we are going to then build a plan.
So you have seen that certain ones are directly linked, for example the question of access and the question of quality of access, the question of sustainability and the question of the medium and the long term.
It's normal, all these principles have a link, all these principles have to be articulated which then leads to a plan.
