Hello.
After exploring the theoretical notion of adhesion of a mode of transport to the territory, I propose in this video to explore together the adhesion of the Algiers tramway.
This is part of the results of a thesis directed at the Catholic University of Louvain under the direction of Professor Bernard Declève.
In the previous video, we explored the various aspects of adhesion, which are the spatial adhesion, adhesion in terms of uses and practices and adhesion in terms of organizational processes and actors games.
From these three points we will in this video assess the adhesion of the Algiers tramway.
The tram is, at least we can say, a trend.
It reappeared in many cities around the world after an absence of half a century in favor of the car.
Algerian cities, and Algiers in particular, are not far behind.
Indeed, Algiers has a first tramway line in 2011.
It is at the center of the Bay of Algiers, as you can see here on the representation of municipal boundaries, within the wilaya of Algiers, which is the first administrative division of the country.
The Algiers tramway was thought to decongest traffic and move the population to live and habitat to the east to workplaces in the center.
The first line in operation spans 16.2 km and includes 28 stations which essentially connect neighborhoods on the outskirts of the east of Algiers.
The line has been extended to the east of the city and it is expected to be the subject of a further extension to the west.
In its path, the line crosses diverse neighborhoods from different periods of development of the city.
These are various urban configurations, involving urban morphology diversity, configuration of urban space and actors involved in production planning.
One of the problems encountered during the project analysis is that it comes through these urban forms following a unique model of double track on site without worrying about the specifics of each urban area, or the template of the size of the road.
The tram has come to transform the road it occupies by redesigning the public space throughout its grip without considering what happens on either side of the line.
This is a kind of tube which passes through the town being isolated from its territory.
Therefore, the tram does not contribute to any eventual tranformation of the crossed districts and does not constitute an urban renewal engine as is the case for most rail projects in other cities.
It can be seen well in this photograph of the slaughterhouse district, which is the most extreme case and where fences were installed to isolate brownfields pending a possible urban renewal project.
Of having been designed as a single line occupying the road it crosses, tram sometimes helps to divide the districts into two.
It is in some places an impenetrable barrier because of the security device of the site.
It is therefore in these disconnected from the parts of territory it crosses.
Therefore, the evaluation of the tramway grip makes sense.
It is relevant to assess the project and its link to neighborhoods and urban forms crossed.
But also, to assess the practices it generates, as well as games of actors that revolve around him.
We'll start with the adhesion in terms of organizational process and actors games.
The following diagram shows the various actors that are or not involved in the process of realization of the Algiers tramway which is represented by the vertical green arrow in the center of the image.
The process is divided horizontally into three phases: the design, implementation and exploitation.
From left to right, there are different types of players: the public sector, the private sector and those of civil society.
It is clearly seen through analysis that the actors involved in the process of realization of the tram are essentially actors from the public sector.
It is the Ministry of Transport that initiates the project, which was then co-driven by a series of public actors.
It is basically centralized actors.
Local authorities had an advisory role.
They had no power to take decisions in the process of manufacturing the tram.
The wilaya of Algiers, for example, had a simple role in the steering committee.
Its proposals have not all been taken into account.
This is particularly true of the line extension proposal to the airport, which was strongly defended by the wilaya of Algiers.
It is quite relevant because there is not yet a common transport connection from the airport, apart from a few taxis and some private buses.
The proposal is relevant because it connects directly to the airport and it also connects to the university and the line of commuter trains.
This proposal has so far not been considered.
The municipalities, in turn, had an advisory role.
They had no power of decision or proposal.
However, some of them have joined the process in more or less informal or rather marginal way.
They have begun arrangements that attempt to a certain continuity between the public spaces equipped with the arrival of the tram and the streets perpendicular to the line or the abandoned areas near the tramway.
In terms of private sector actors and civil society, there was very little implications outside of realization companies and exploitation.
These actors were completely excluded from the process.
However, some of them joined it through the conflict.
This is the case of traders and residents who joined the project when they found out about its realization.
Traders demanded compensation for damage caused and have achieved.
The people on the other, including those of Ben Redouane neighborhood at the est extension, have demonstrated to get a nearby station from their homes.
They blocked the site claiming their right to have a nearby station.
They set up banners containing the following slogan:
"No stop! No tram! "
Their claims have been supported after completion of the extension of the line.
Today, a new station is being installed to meet their needs.
However, a consideration of the expectations of people and all other stakeholders early in the process would have avoided conflicts and additional costs caused by the delay of works by a new study and by changing the line in full operation.
From this analysis, we can say that the tram was in-adherent in terms of organizational processes and actors games.
It ruled out a number of key players in the production of the Algerian territory.
Now come to the adhesion in terms of practices and uses.
Accordingly to official figures, the tram would have recorded 18 million passengers the first two years of operation.
This represents half of the project forecasts and much less than its actual transport capacity.
The data is based on ticket sales and validation.
But in reality, we could observe through field surveys that the tram is full at any time of the day and all the days of the week.
Interviews with controllers, ticket sellers, drivers and users have shown that the majority of travelers do not buy their tickets or never validated it.
This is due to lack of control on the one hand and degradation of the composting machines at some stations on the other.
Also, even though the price is higher than other modes of transport, the tram is widely used because of the lack of control and therefore it is free.
The analysis of the quality of service, accessibility and the security apparatus and the use of the tram show that it is fully adherent in terms of practice.
However, adhesion might be improving if a single pricing is in place for all transport modes and that the network is reorganized to converge other modes of transport, including buses, to the tram, or it could deteriorate if more controls and a rate increase with a decrease of state subsidies.
Finally, just to present the spatial grip of the Algiers tramway.
First at the metropolitan level.
We can see on the picture, at the scale of the wilaya of Algiers, there is currently three important lines of transport.
There is the tram, metro and train.
The three are interconnected and will serve for now only a part of the center and the outskirts of Algiers.
To be adherent at the metropolitan level, tram must shift from one mode of transport to another and serve through intermodal throughout the territory of the city.
Beyond these three modes of transport on rails, the public transport network of Algiers is basically bus lines.
Part is public, the other is made of a multiplicity of individual carriers.
The problem is that the bus network has been reorganized with the arrival of the tram and the metro.
Some lines run parallel to the tram.
They are competing, especially in terms of price, travel time and stops flexibility when it comes to private carriers.
These carriers stop at any point of the street depending on the application.
These buses do not allow a drawdown on the tram, which has very little intermodal stations.
It is therefore not possible to reach all points of the metropolitan territory from the tramway.
It is therefore in-adherent at the metropolitan level.
What about locally?
As part of research on the tram, we conducted sample analysis at different scales throughout the tram.
Adherence is analyzed from eight frames of one square kilometer representing a distance of comfortable walking movement
500 meters from both sides of the line.
In these frames, we identified the different characteristic elements of the territory based and story filled on elements defined by Kevin Lynch <i> The city Image </ i>.
These are nodes and centralities, cue points and routes, limits, sub-districts, mobility elements, equipment and public spaces.
Next, we analyzed the relationship of the tram with these components having the hiking metric reference.
The job was to see if it is possible from a station within walking distance of all the elements of the territory, to cross boundaries, to join a public space and so on ...
It was possible for each element to identify five possible configurations ranking from less adherent to the more adherent.
This is nonadherent configurations, non-adherent configurations but with a grip potential, adherent configurations by the pedestrian link, adherent configurations proximity and adherent configurations by juxtaposition of the elements.
To better understand, it is interesting to illustrate some configurations by concrete evidence.
Here we find the Bab Ezzouar University City station.
You can see a close proximity of the station with buildings of the University City Bab Ezzouar 1.
There was almost a superposition of elements and therefore a very good adhesion of the tram to this equipment.
It is in this configuration.
In the same place, you can see bus shelters on the same platform as the tram.
Here too, there is a very good adhesion of the tram mobility system through a juxtaposition of elements.
The tram station is the same as the bus station.
Always from the Bab Ezzouar University City station, if you look across to the city of accommodation of 8 May 1945 one can see a fence separating the tram of the city.
It was installed with the arrival of the tram, therefore creating a new limit.
Although the tramway merges with that limit, it has a binding potential because it would be enough to open some access to the city to create new connections and improve adhesion of the tram to the city for housing.
Entering inside the city of 8 May 1945 we can see a range of facilities including the school, which is isolated by a fence, and an easy walk is strewn with obstacles.
It also includes the market in the heart of the city housing occupying public roads.
The problem is that these items are less than 500 meters fron the previous station but access is not easy because public space is furnished and is strewn with obstacles.
The people complain in particular of the mud in winter and insecurity for children crossing through these barriers.
The connections are absent and space is abandoned.
The tram is in-adherent to these facilities.
If we sum up all configurations encountered for each district and each element, we find the following table.
It was made clear that in most areas analyzed configurations are in-adherent.
However, in four of the seven elements analyzed, there is a majority of in-adherent configurations but which have binding potential.
You can see the orange in the table.
Sometimes just small actions are needed to improve adhesion of the tram to the territory through which it passes, as we saw with the fence separating the tram of the city housing, where we just need to open access.
The question now is how to improve the adhesion of the tram and how to use the grip not as a simple analysis tool but also as a project tool.
The following picture shows a project outline which served as part of doctoral research to establish discussions with stakeholders of the Algerian territory in order to converge their concerns about the tramway.
The following picture shows a project outline which served as part of doctoral research to establish discussions with stakeholders of the Algerian territory in order to converge their concerns about the tramway.
The idea is to strengthen the adhesion of the tram by improving connections between stations and the various elements of the territory that we have identified.
Priority development axes are available in red on the map and continue the development already achieved in the tramway and who will go  connect devices or characteristic elements of the territory and then cross the boundaries to connect parts of the city.
Most of these facilities are facilities to improve the existing road to promote pedestrian movement.
Others are new connections made from the grind of large land surfaces or opening of access to certain public facilities as can be seen here.
We also propose in this project to prioritize the use of land favoring the use of potential land lying along the designated public spaces, which can be seen here in grey.
Future programs that will be installed will receive a good adhesion of the tram and therefore a good transport links.
We also offer, in certain configurations, to divert bus lines or move stops to bring them closer to the tram station.
In this video, we explored all the analytical potential of this notion of grip.
We saw that the Algiers tramway although it is adherent in terms of practices and uses, is completely in-adherent in spatial terms and in terms of organizational processes and actors games.
We have also seen that this notion of adhesion can serve as a project tool.
If it is not integrated upstream in the process, it can always be used to better integrate the transport infrastructures after their completion.
