Hello, in today's video we'll discuss transportation, travel, mobility, and the link between transportation, land-use planning and urban planning.
There is a direct and concrete link between the transportation system and the urban landscape.
It's the story of the chicken and the egg.
We don't know if it's the transportation system which creates the urban form, or the urban form which generates the transportation system.
It's both at the same time.
I imagine one plays on the other and vice versa.
But we must keep in mind this extremely important correlation between the two.
There is an overlap between urban form and its systems of transportation.
A concrete example: employment areas.
The densest areas are also the zones where we find the most public transport, for example.
Why is that? Because of issues of cost-effectiveness.
For a public transport system to be economically viable, or at least useful, it requires a minimum number of people within a given perimeter.
Without this, the transportation system has absolutely no purpose.
And so we have this overlap between population density and the opportunity of having public transportation.
What this also means is that it influences land-use costs.
The more public transport, the greater the connectivity, the more networks, the higher the land cost.
There is a correlation between, on this side here, density, and the number of trips per person.
If I am in my car, my density increases, and the fewer trips I will make by car.
And if we look at the bicycle, or of walking,
I am in the opposite position, because the denser I am, the more walking I will do and also take public transport.
The denser I am the more I will walk.
So when we speak of transportation, of cars, of trips taken, we are speaking equally of traffic congestion.
In order to avoid traffic congestion we must ensure that the road grid, the roadway system, is extremely diffuse, hierarchical, and that it connects all zones of significant population.
On the contrary, we can imagine that the best system of traffic control is traffic congestion.
In principal, highway engineers, transportation engineers, jump up and down when they hear that, but it is one way to regulate it.
Rather than expanding the roadways each time in order to allow more people to pass through them we might say, instead, that the limit is reached, to leave the congestion, certain that new arrivals will not take those routes because they are already congested.
An American urban planner, whose name escapes me, said something which is very true, which is that one cannot cure obesity by loosening one's belt.
In the road system, the more roads I make, the more highways I build, the greater the travel, for the more cars I have, the greater the need for roads and highways.
We learn this relatively quickly, but we arrive very quickly at the saturation point of the infrastructure we've put in place.
We are at saturation, and we create new highways which in a few years will equally be at saturation.
So we must keep this in mind while planning.
We must know what we are doing.
More is often the enemy of what is good, for it is not because I create more roads that the situation will improve.
And on the contrary, once again, road congestion regulates traffic.
Second element after congestion, car-free zones.
It is trending in European countries, more and more in the U.S.
Let's take the case of New York, where entire zones have been returned to the pedestrian.
They began this way, for there weren't many cars, but the roadways and the right-of-way was given to the vehicle, so today the attempt is to reduce the right-of-ways dedicated to vehicles, and give them to pedestrians.
This is a modern approach, one that absolutely should be promoted.
This is one of our principles, which we saw in an earlier video on core principles for planning.
It is extremely important, particularly for the African cities, where the enormous majority of people are pedestrians.
A quote that I like very much, which is from the ex-mayor of Bogota, who served between 2011-2012, which says that "a developed country is not a place where the poor have cars.
It's where the rich use public transportation."
And it is truly here where work needs to be done.
It is on this model, the social model behind it, and it is not the idea that everyone will have a car, since the rates of car ownership in Africa are fewer than 100 vehicles per 1000 inhabitants, so this is a puddle compared to Europe, which is at around 500 vehicles per 1000 inhabitants, or the U.S. where there are more than 600 per 1000.
We see that when it comes to the European and American models there is a lot of latitude, and the idea is not just to utilize this margin, but rather to reflect upon which system to put in place.
We have transportation options, for as we plan we must make choices, and these choices depend on a certain number of criteria.
Among the transportation options we have the bus, the BRT, the light rail, the metro, with investment requirements, capacity, speed, travel time and environmental impact.
And in each case we can classify these as either low, medium, high, or very high.
So we know that with the metro, for example, we have a very large investment, but a capacity which is also very high, and a speed which is very high, etc.
On the other hand, the bus, which has low investment requirements, a medium capacity, but also a very low speed.
So we find that, depending on the choices one makes, we will not have the same impact on the environment, the same capacity, and the interesting relation is ultimately that between on the one hand the capacity and the investment, which gives a cost per person or cost per kilometer.
The modal choice, the choice of mode of transport is an individual one.
The people will decide which method of transport to take, which they'll choose depending on certain criteria, which include the distance to travel, the shape one is in,
Can I move about or not?
The time needed for travel, if I have five minutes of travel time it is not that same as if I have an hour, so I will choose my method of transportation differently,
My load---what do I have to carry?
Do I have just a bag or a full load?
Comfort level, security. Am I more secure using one method or another?
And, finally, parking availability, which is logical, for if I take my vehicle I want to know and be certain that I will be able to find a place to park.
Otherwise I might choose a different mode of transport.
Here's an example, in N'Djamena, between its northern and southern areas, where we see cars, bicycles, motorbikes, and, of course, all along it the pedestrians who cross the bridge.
When we discuss modal choice there is the question of the individual who makes this choice, but also the question of the collective.
What are the operative choices?
And what are the criteria used to make these choices for the collective public?
In sum, we can go on foot, on a bike, motorcycle, private car, taxi, public transportation.
And all these modes, whether public or private, have, most of the time, their own specificity, as we'll see.
And we should reflect today, in terms of space.
Not all modes of transport use the same space.
If I have here a lane which measures 3.5 meters we know that of pedestrians, we will have 
19,000 who can pass per hour, we'll have 14,000 bicycles,
So more pedestrians will pass per hour than bicycles.
And we know that with mixed traffic, only 2,000 people will pass.
So space plays an important role, when I plan the space at my disposition, the space which I want to put at the disposition of the people who travel through it.
Equity---which is extremely important, particularly in the cities of the south, social equity.
For the moment we give access to the fastest, the heaviest, the richest, and we can imagine a system which grants access to the less costly, the less polluting, the most fragile.
Why not?
This is truly the question of equity.
What do I favor and who will I favor?
The question of security also becomes very important.
To lower the number of accidents is an extremely important phenomenon today, since the number of auto accidents in cities is considerable.
The question of energy.
We know that the energy spent differs depending on the mode of transport.
We must choose each time-- which will we use, which will we not?
The environment.
Clearly linked to energy, but the impact on the environment of certain modes of transport is much greater than others.
The car has a significantly greater impact on the environment, logically, than the bike.
So these are the choices one must make and, finally, a very important criterion to consider is that of cost.
These are not the same if we are walking, on a bike, or taking public transport.
And it's not the same thing if the cost is paid, if the transport is paid by private car or by taxi.
Who bears the costs?
And how much does this transport cost?
There is cost per kilometer, theoretic cost, and then there is, finally, whether it is the collective who pays a portion of this cost, or the owner who pays all costs.
So, a brief overview.
How do I plan? How do I make choices? modal choices, individual choices, collective choices.
And we must keep in mind that the choices I make are those of society, of equity or inequity, and above all, they will have an enormous impact on the environment.
We can use the environment, or energy as our main criteria, but we might also take into account multiple aspects, and utilize in an articulate way all criteria in order to make the best choices.
But always keep in mind that urban form and transportation systems are directly linked.
When we discuss climate change, we'll keep this in mind.
When we discuss density, we'll keep this in mind, this question of urban form and transportation or public transport.
And we know that the diffuse city is the urban form least favorable to public transport.
