Hello, my name is Gordana Micic.
I am an engineer-architect and researcher at the Catholic University of Louvain and I will present the case of multimodal Schuman hub in Brussels.
Brussels, a region made up of 19 municipalities, is the capital of Belgium.
Belgium is a country made up of three regions: the Flemish region, the Walloon region and the Brussels Capital Region.
Being located in the central part of the country, and at the same time, entirely in the Flemish region,
Brussels-Capital Region proves to be an important point of articulation of the rail network, and this both nationally and internationally.
As you can see, this network, spider-shaped, is connecting the most important cities of the country, and among others, the city of Luxembourg.
These lines are reinforced today by high speed lines which provide the link between France, Britain,
Germany and the Netherlands. mainly through the junction of central Brussels which is subjected to a terminating resistance constantly increasing, as shown in this diagram, it is essential to look for other opportunities passage that would make the train avoid the said junction.
The project <i> Diabolo </ i> commissioned in 2012 by SNCB and Infrabel, is used to connect the national airport directly to the major Belgian and international rail routes.
Therefore, a service between Liège and Germany on the one hand, and Antwerp and the Netherlands on the other hand, is possible without having to go through the center of Brussels.
The diagnosis of the project <i> Diabolo </ i> demonstrated the justification of the realization
Schuman-Josaphat tunnel, shown here in red, between the lines 161 and 26, which was put into circulation in December 2014.
This tunnel has to link the cities of Namur-Luxembourg and the Netherlands via Brussels-National.
It is expected that several lines of the future RER regional express network will stop at Brussels-Schuman station which will continue to welcome the passage of regular trains.
For the new tunnel, the European district will be available by 12-15 minutes of train from the domestic airport, instead of 25-30 minutes before.
Therefore, this multimodal center, supported by the subway system, and with easy connections with the bus, is the main subject of this paper.
Meanwhile, a blueprint, conducted under the direction of Marie-Laure Roggemans in 2008 confirmed the importance of achieving a multimodal Schuman hub part of which is nearing completion.
It is important to underline this blueprint was based on a tripartite Memorandum of Understanding concluded between the Federal State and the Brussels-Capital Region: the municipality of the city of Brussels and the municipalities of Etterbeek and Ixelles signed in 2006.
This vast urban master plan includes 12 programs, two of particular interest to us here: the Schuman multimodal station and the redevelopment of the Schuman roundabout.
As you see here, the Schuman multimodal hub is presented by the white square, which will serve as a frame of observation.
Aerial view of our square gives us a view of the situation on the ground.
As you can see, the Schuman roundabout is the central point of Robert Schuman place.
Indeed, the red color represents the main transit of cars entering the city of Liege on one side, coming to Brussels by the Cortenbergh Avenue, crossing the Schuman roundabout and head downtown through the rue de la Loi.
Another transit entering the side of Namur via the central tunnel under the roundabout also joined the rue de la Loi, towards the city center.
Meanwhile, several bus lines, public transport here in pink, are circulating, ensuring the liaison between Place Schuman and other areas of the city.
In addition, the bike path of a bike RER, represented by the color yellow, through the same roundabout, ensuring active accessibility to the city center.
But what happens in the basement?
The Schuman train and metro station Schuman that you see in orange-yellow, because entirely underground, have just been transformed into depth to accommodate a railroad stop in the new section connecting the lines 161 and 26, here in pale pink.
The old line 26 leading to the North Station and the city center, is shown in purple.
In fact, originally,
Schuman metro station of the East-West axis was connected to the Schuman station in 1969.
Metro docks have a length of 300 m, to facilitate access to the station, one of the two guest rooms is shared between the metro and railway.
Today, this initial configuration completely transformed by the new inter-modal project whose main objective is to move the center of gravity from the automotive use to the public transport, which in this case requires an inter-connection building between three means of transportation: train, subway and bus on the surface.
Here interlocks a loop of road networks located directly on the Schuman roundabout.
The outgoing transit traffic from the city center, here in light green color, from Rue Belliard, located further south, takes up the avenue Cortenbergh via a tunnel.
On the other side, as already announced earlier, transit traffic entering the side of Namur borrows the central tunnel towards the city center and the small ring, here in dark green color.
Each time, the access to underground car parks are associated with it.
So if we superimpose all these flows, it is obvious that the Schuman roundabout is a rather complex exchange point.
The situation is more clearly visible in the longitudinal section through the station.
This subway station is located at -2 level, then, at -1, the two existing train lines and the new section.
The road tunnel goes through the space of the metro station whose difference in height from the road inspired the consultancy Van Campenhout in charge of the project, to incorporate skylights to take advantage of daylight in the subway station.
The introduction of natural light, combined with the full opening of the interior space of the station between the two rooms wickets, allowed users to feel in direct contact with the road in life, and at the same time, to have the feeling of closeness.
Similarly, the issue of accessibility for all users has been particularly studied.
Many elevators for people with reduced mobility, the effectiveness of which, for now, can not yet be assessed, are being installed.
Namely, that the construction of the large pavilion, that you see here in purple, was conditioned by the question of its integration in the future project of the place Schuman, which was to be executed later.
Here is a diagram of the project stakeholders.
It is funded primarily by the state, represented by Beliris, and partly by Infrabel and the Brussels-Capital Region.
The owner will be the region of Brussels, Infrabel and B-Holding.
The use of space is part of the inter-municipal transport company of Brussels: STIB, SNCB, Infrabel and also B-Holding.
Between the owners and operators, specific agreements are established, specifying the obligations of each party.
To appreciate the difference between before and after the work, here are some pictures of the situation pre-work.
Here, we see the same roundabout, with the incoming strip to the city center, the tunnel of the band entering the side of Namur towards the city center, and a local lanes.
The following is the closer view then the perspective view to the fiftieth anniversary, then seeing the same Schuman place to the street of the Law and the city center, and finally, the view of the dock level of the subway station before work.
This major project is about to be completed.
Here are some pictures of the project and station-station as planned and in their current state.
The project's first picture shows the new skylights that allowed to introduce daylight in the subway station, as we saw earlier.
Then the following picture shows the flag of the station-station and its integration, as originally planned by the project but not yet built, or perhaps not at all built.
The following shows the space of today's Metro.
The railway bridge animates and traverses this space by taking the place of a spectator.
The train already goes through.
Pictures on the right concern the two train stops, in itself.
The first belongs to the line 161, toward the city center and the rest of Brussels, and the second to the new Schuman-Josaphat section.
After observing the problems of the multimodal Schuman pole, we will explore the development of the public space of the Place Schuman.
Now if we go back to the base plan the master plan of the European district, we observed before that the entering automobile traffic borrows the Avenue Cortenbergh around the Schuman roundabout to engage in the rue de la Loi towards the city center.
This heavy traffic creates true urban barriers for pedestrian traffic.
To enable the development of a quality public space, the blueprint for the European neighborhood calls for traffic tunneling road transit of Cortenbergh Avenue, closing the Schuman roundabout to transit traffic and then the construction of a tunnel under the rue de la Loi.
On the side of the rue de la Loi, given the limited space and limited in area the blueprint advocated the use of the basement, currently occupied by parking cars, indicated by the color orange, while maintaining the roads for local traffic, this time, in both directions.
A competition law urban project was launched in 2008, the winner of which is the Atelier Christian de Portzamparc.
This project, which provides a complete restructuring of the neighborhood Act is oriented towards integration of a large mixing area utilization.
It includes an increase in office space of 240,000 m² and housing up to 110 000 sq.m. while developing shops and local facilities.
The regional planning regulations zoned provides passage through an open street, by reducing the number of traffic lanes, the creation of inter-neighborhood pedestrian crossings via the ground floor shops and other amenities, and the creation of pocket parks.
This project allows for green lawns, gardens, shops and a favored circulation for pedestrians.
However, a friendly rue de la Loi already has twice a bridge, but without actually gained space in favor of pedestrians in the section regarding the existing alignment.
The realization of this project is planned gradually.
Today, only the reduction of a lane for cars and the construction of a bike path instead, has been made.
Meanwhile, what is happening at the Schuman roundabout, directly affected by these proposed changes?
Indeed, being mainly a road infrastructure, the change in mobility seen in the Loi district allows the development of urban space instead of Schuman.
A redevelopment competition of the Schuman place was launched in November 2009 by Beliris whose winner is the architectural firm Xaveer of Geyter.
This bold project which consists of a redevelopment of the site and its surroundings, is carried by the idea of ​​creating a true agora which takes the form of an amphitheater.
It incorporates the perspective view to the fiftieth anniversary, dear to Brussels.
The symbolic power of the unification of Europe is underlined by the circular shape which can host events and demonstrations.
While remaining in simplicity, this original project, with a strong identity, organizes space to pedestrian scale while strengthening the urban center of the Place Schuman.
Here are some pictures that of Europe gathering place.
But what about the suppression of transit traffic on the Schuman roundabout?
For the record, incoming traffic borrows Avenue Cortenbergh around the Schuman roundabout to join the rue de la Loi and the city center.
The counting done by the Office of Stratec studies in 2009, between 7 am and 8 am, indicates the passage from 1890 vehicles on the roundabout, the flow of cars entering arrives by the side of the Cortenbergh Avenue.
Providing a comprehensive mobility plan demonstrates that it is possible to gradually reduce this traffic density to only 100 vehicles by a deviation pf transit traffic that should also be accompanied by other mobility planning measures more generally.
The solution is moving the traffic transit of the avenue Cortenbergh's tunnel.
Indeed, it will use the space of the technical vacuum between the existing tunnel of outgoing traffic from downtown and the new railway tunnel Schuman-Josaphat.
It should be connected to the central tunnel by the Montgomery incoming side, from Namur towards the city center.
This operation will enable the removal of transit traffic through the Schuman roundabout.
Decided in 2009 by the government,
This project was to be financed jointly by the Brussels-Capital region and Beliris.
However, since then, the budget reserve of Beliris provided for the construction of the tunnel, as well as the Loi urban project has been assigned to other projects.
For its part, the Brussels-Capital Region can not afford to bear alone the work.
You should know that the realization of this tunnel conditions the realization of the Schuman project that other complexities began to arise, making it an even more complex borne by the architect, in a non-scheduled manner initially, and that in the meantime the political priorities of the moment were diverted to other projects in the city.
So Beliris was forced to cancel the project.
So today, the suspense surrounding the planning of the Schuman roundabout, and the European quarter, continues.
Indeed, it must be admitted that large urban projects and of mobility mobilize large numbers pf actors on the urban scene.
Moreover, the implementation of these projects, often very complex, and dependent on a multiplicity of other urban systems factors, is part of a long duration.
With time, other needs of the city may arise, which can influence the political elites, to review their priorities and to modify or abandon certain projects as they were imagined at the start, which indeed happened here, for the multimodal Schuman pole.
