We are going to talk about two things.
First of all the issues of density and which are the phenomena that influence this density.
And secondly how to make our networks profitable when we draw up the subdivision.
The first element which influences density is the issue of the size of the lots or of the right to build.
We can also increase the rights to build and this will increase the density and we can also change the size of the lot.
The more the plot grows, the more density will decrease.
The issue of public facilities.
It's necessary, the more people we have, the more it becomes profitable to have public facilities.
This seems very logical.
There is the issue of temporality which clearly influences the question of density.
We can find ourselves in less densely populated neighborhoods that decades later begin to densify, becoming very densely populated working class neighborhoods.
The issue also of public transportation has an influence in two ways.
We need many people for transportation to be profitable and conversely, the more transportation I have, the more people I can have in my neighborhoods.
And finally the question of public space.
In fact, the more dense I am, the more I densify, the more I have a significant number of people, the less large lots I have, and so the more I need generous public spaces which allow people to have a little breathing room in the city.
The symbol of this public space is 
Central Park where New York is of an incredible density and finally we have this green lung in the middle.
It's a symptomatic example.
There are many others in the cities.
This doesn't necessarily have to be parks, these can be plazas, these can be large boulevards, but we need, at some point, to have space so that the people who live in this density are able to enjoy themselves in the open air.
How to increase density?
We have begun to see this.
We have two solutions, either we decrease the size of the lots and the length of the facade.
We will see in a little while how to do this.
We might increase the building rights.
We might decrease the areas which are not assigned to housing.
Rather than make parks and plazas, you are making housing and this will allow you to increase density.
We quickly see that it is not an option and then we refer back to the question of the increase in building rights.
Since there are rarely controls on these building rights, we need to have a policing of constructions which would be vigilant to say if, yes or no, this was done to code.
And well, we'll also realize that it's a rare possibility and so the only way is to decrease the size and the length on the street to increase the density.
Profitability of plots or rather of networks.
The influence of the size plays an important role on public spending.
I take my plot, let's say my four plots, versus here six plots, right?
If I have 100 linear meters this means that there will be a pipe here, each one with connections.
On 100 meters, I will be able to, in the first example with my facade on the street of 25 meters connect four households while here,
I would have six households with a plot of 6.67.
And it's clear that the more the plot decreases, the more the distance on the street decreases, the more I can increase my density, but the more
I can reduce my public spending per unit.
Profitability of networks and transferable areas.
What is a transferable area?
So let me show a quick diagram.
Here we have a large plot with two blocks and then we are going to quickly draw, we have plots here, we have some here also with a large plot in this spot here.
So, once again, to advance quickly, we can imagine that this whole area here is devoted to housing.
That's what we call transferable area.
It's to put housing and then we would have this plot here which would be facilities and then eventually the rest of the plots, here would be what we call the public domain.
So the idea is to say, here we have transferable areas.
It has to be at 50%.
You will often find it at a much larger proportion.
Here, public domain, we have between
20% and 25% and then the facilities, large infrastructures also between 20% and 25%.
So of course, if we are at 20% of roads, we have to give 30% to facilities, but let's say that we're at 20%-25% also in this place here with the facilities.
We can reduce the transferable area, we can increase it.
Many increase it to have more to sell and of course to make better economic transactions.
But don't forget that it's very important to have places where the people, the denser it is, the more need there is for places where people can go and meet and that's why the facilities area plus the public domain should also be at 50%.
Making the networks profitable.
So we have several possibilities.
We have already partially seen how we can increase the number of constructions by plot, we can decrease the facade on the street, we can decrease the overall size of the plot or consolidate the plots in a cul-de-sac as we will see in a little bit with the diagrams that we will draw in a few moments.
Let's go back to our drawings.
Making the networks profitable at a constant size means that if we want the size to remain the same, of the plot, we have to decrease the street facade.
This means we have a diagram that is roughly like this because each time that I decrease the size of my plot, 
I have to increase the depth so if I have here 15 out of 30, 
I'll have 12, sorry, 12 out of 37.5,
I will have 10 out of 45 etc., etc.,
But we must be very careful about what is left in a proportion.
If I have a building here, often we go to at least 12 meters.
This means 12 x 37 since the plots that would be like this are just unconstructible and thus uninhabitable.
If I take the constant proportion this time.
So it's no longer necessarily the size of the plot but that I want to keep the proportion so that it is a rectangle, so I still have this type of proportion and not the one we drew earlier.
Well, we find ourselves in a situation where, here, we draw the plot, the proportion is here and 
I want to increase,
I'm going to increase each time here in my plot in the proportions.
So if I go to 7.5, I will have 10, 
12.5, 15 etc., etc.,
So there it is, this is a graphical geometric trick, to increase, in constant proportion, the size of the plots.
The proportion of the plots.
Here also it's very important.
We have just seen it.
A plot like this would be almost unconstructible.
So, roughly, we have plots that would be rectangles which are, in fact, based on a double square and we are going to find plots that are 12 x 14 or even plots that are 30 x 15, 9 x 18.
Why the double square?
It's that we can then, when we draw the subdivision, we can then easily return the plot, since we have here 9 and 9 so we have the necessary 18.
There it is.
So if I'm dealing with the double square
I can draw my plot geometrically, very easily and return it in the end to the block.
Making the networks profitable also means regrouping the plots.
So, once again, let's quickly draw four plots, let's draw four other plots.
Here, I'm drawing my houses, which are little individual houses in the center, and I'm drawing a version where the houses are regrouped.
In the first version of my drawing,
I have a conduit and each time individual conduits.
In the second, we can imagine, like this, to save the number, the linear meter of conduit, which makes it so that it's profitable, as we go along the networks since 
I'm regrouping the plots.
Yet another possibility, which is very seldom used but which exists is that here, 
I have my main road, here I have my plots, I'm going to draw, each time, my four plots, and then I can draw my buildings here, there it is.
The idea here is to have a sort of technical gain, like in a building, except that it's in the subdivision, where we have a gain that happens here.
So we maybe have here a meter available and then we have, each time, the networks which, are then distributed in this manner.
So it's of course very, it's of course possible, this diagram here is still possible but is very seldom used and then, unfortunately, it's finally these diagrams that we find most often since they're done one after the other and since there is no need, like this to have to coordinate with the neighbor, to create, to make the networks profitable.
So then, once we have made the networks profitable, we must still find the balance between land and real estate.
As such, there are several elements that will be taken into account, the first element is land cost, the second, the real estate investment.
Then we have a balance mechanism which has to happen between the two.
There are geometry questions and right of use which is taken into account.
And land cost determines economic interest, it's what we are going to see as we continue.
So land cost is at the same time the price of land acquisition plus the state of this land, plus the provision, the networks, plus, in certain cases, not always, the facilities.
There it is.
All of this represents my land cost.
Managing the future: how to manage the future?
In the first example here, we have a plot which seems to us much too slack, the public domain areas are much too big and then finally the plot will not be, without a doubt, profitable.
On the other hand, if I have an extremely dense situation, it will no longer be possible, mid stream, to add other new facilities.
So we will try to find a balance between these two situations.
The other thing also, is if I have only small plots available for the facilities, this will not work either, since at some point there will be facilities, of much larger scale, in place.
So the idea is to have both large facilities plots as well as small plots, both enough space here, there it's too little and not too much either, there.
So it's a mix of these two and it's really important to take into account the plot in the long term, to understand how it's going to evolve and the needs that it will have in the future.
So, do not go on something too large because finally if the plot is much too big, there is a risk of it not filling up, but it's important to be pragmatic, and to give enough available space so as to then be able to continue to densify the plot as it should.
Then, once we have tried to make the networks profitable, once we have discussed the land cost, once we have imagined how to draw our plot, we still have to discuss the level of facilities that will be put in place.
The level of equipment is the quality of the service infrastructure we want.
I this can be very high level, high-end, where I want water, electricity, fiber optics, or, on the contrary, I can have situations where I want a provision, the simplest possible, meaning some standposts, a relatively flat and directly constructible area, and highways which are in fact only right-of-way openings and that's all.
So between the high-end and a very low-end development, we see that the costs are very different since the quantity of networks, the quantity of services to put in place is very different.
When we talk of network issues, of levels of facilities, we are of course talking about sanitation first.
Am I going to put in place a collective sanitation system or an individual sanitation system?
The drinking water supply: what kind of supply?
By standpost or directly on the plot?
The other networks: telephone networks, electricity networks.
Are all the parcels connected to the electrical grid, or do I produce only public lighting?
Finally, the facilities: markets, schools.
Am I going to put all of the necessary facilities on my plot or, as in the main principles that we mentioned in another video, is that I'm going to outsource these facilities and consolidate them elsewhere than in my plot?
Finally public spaces: ensuring that they are sufficient, ensuring they are in the right place so that people can use them fully.
There you have it, the profitability of networks.
Facilities issues hold no more secrets.
We have gone very quickly over the issues of facilities and infrastructures.
We don't have the time to look at this in more detail and depth but this gives us a sort of general view of what we need to do when we are planning a plot.
Don't forget that it is really by the geometric tool, the reduction of the facade or increased building rights, but we have seen that there are very few cases where this works, so it's really the geometric tool which allows, when you create a plot, to render your plots more or less profitable.
Don't forget that a plot must register in the duration and that moment zero is not the same as at 10 years, 
15 years, 20 years or 50 years.
And this duration, it's what is most difficult to take into account but it's what makes the issue of the plot.
And good plots, it's when we are able to take into account the notion of time and the notion of duration in planning which we are putting in place.
