In this video we'll follow the creation, step-by-step, of a development.
Many stages, the first of which is choosing a site.
As a matter of fact, for the same program within a city several possible sites will, in general, be possible
It is thus a question of evaluating them, to choose the best site for our program.
To this end we'll have a grid of questions which will help us, as we'll see, to decide which site is best for the program we are implementing.
Here is our questionnaire and the space for its responses.
It will be easy to quickly eliminate certain sites.
And in addition to these responses is the question of building costs, which we'll address at the end.
But it is possible to do a very quick evaluation of the different costs involved to know what is, finally, the most cost-effective and viable site.
Another thing is we are speaking here of technical choices, rational choices, from the point of view of the city's manager.
We are not talking about political or economic questions, which also have their importance, and which are often even more important in site choice, whether to build or not.
The first question: building according to the SDAU.
Does the master development plan say that the land is viable for building?
We'll imagine that the answer is yes, otherwise we'd stop here.
A development zone: is it zoned for residential or zoned for industrial use?
Now, let's also imagine that it's zoned for development, for residential development.
Now we are in a case study.
There are cities which do not have a SDAU.
There are cities which have an SDAU, but don't respect it.
There are cities which do not have POS.
There are cities which have POS, of land-use plans, but which don't respect them.
So really what we have here for the first two responses, are case studies.
Availability of the land?
Again, we'll assume it is, otherwise the questionnaire would end there.
If the site is not available for building, there is no point in asking further questions.
A slope of less than 8%? Why?
Because when it exceeds 8%, or 9 or 10%, building on the slope becomes difficult, and the additional costs for construction on a slope are such that it no longer makes sense, except for a very high-end development.
Otherwise level land is preferable from a cost standpoint, it is also because technically it's easier to manage.
Solid ground?
Yes, we need solid ground which will allow for construction.
Is the distance to the water table greater than three meters?
Yes, because if it is close to the water table, there is a risk of a rising water table, and thus of flooding.
Now we'll go to the column of the "no's" with its major nuisances.
Let's assume there are no major nuisances in this zone.
Let's also assume that there is no pollution risk in the zone, no risk, that the zone is not polluted, and so we can build on it.
And then the question we'll also ask ourselves is that of presence, once the development is complete, will it pose a pollution risk to the immediate environment?
It is there where we'll need a "no," otherwise we'd have to start making choices.
Does it make sense to build there?
Is the land serviced by access roads?
Yes, or no. 
There are two possible responses.
Sufficiently serviced by roads?
Yes or no.
We can have both answers at the same time, because we pass from linear meter to linear kilometer to determine the length of the roadway.
Ultimately, to create roadways is not too difficult.
The question is one of the cost involved in servicing sufficiently this need.
Near public transportation?
Yes, but this, once again, is a case study because in most cities there is no public transport with predetermined routes, but instead it is the transport which goes to areas where there are many people who need it.
Now, if your development is very dense, and has a large population, it is extremely likely that there will be public transport available, whether by minibus, taxi, or motorcycle-taxi.
Water service?
Same thing.
The question? Yes or no.
Can the water be serviced by gravity?
Yes or no.
Now there are different methods, but by gravity is the best, because it is, financially speaking, the most reasonable.
And if there is not, we are once again looking at linear meter.
Electric service?
Same thing, yes or no.
Is the power sufficient?
Yes or no.
If not it will have to be built, and what is the length of the line that must be installed?
Is there a low-tension transformer?
Yes or no, same thing.
So these are questions of public equipment.
For the development will we need construction equipment?
Yes or no.
Perhaps we're building a health-care center, an elementary school, a market, a sports center, and then an administration.
And if not, what is the distance in linear meters to the nearest hospital?
How far is the nearest high-school, or middle school?
These are very important elements, because often undeveloped land is used, so undeveloped that there is no school, no market, it has nothing available, and so we put people in a situation which becomes extreme, because they need access to education or to health-care.
Second step in the creation of our development, is the question of site allocation.
We have, for example ... let's imagine a river here.
We put a bit of water, color it in blue, here.
The question now becomes, which land is conducive to development?
We have here a very steep slope.
We have here a flood zone.
Here we have a forest, and we realize that all of this zone here is not a good place for development. and finally we are left without a doubt, here, this zone, to create our development.
Now to back up a bit, a quick review of the different things we've already discussed.
Sloping terrains, if the land is too steeply sloped, it becomes difficult to build on it.
If the land is uneven, if the land is completely wavy, and it looks like this, for example, there is no point building on it,
It's too difficult, too costly.
Mountains, hillsides, by their very nature are sloping, and these are the lands sought out, generally, by the wealthy.
And in most cities, the shantytowns pop up here, because it is in forests, or on steep slopes, where no one wants to settle.
Quarries, sandy areas, humid zones, areas that are environmentally fragile.
These may be conservation zones which are environmentally protected, or where there are species of flora and fauna found only there,
And no building should be done there, to safeguard them.
Flood zones and archeological sites, or cultural heritage sites, zones like these, natural or built.
There are lands which simply should not be built on.
Now, from the plan we've developed, we'll subtract all those zones where building is not advised.
There too we are with a case study, for in most cities you'll find construction in sandy zones, humid zones, flood zones, but in planning a development we must take these things into account, and in principal remove all zones such as these, subtract them from any plan.
And, finally, all those lands not in the zones described above, become then, buildable lands.
Next we'll perform a diagnosis of the zone.
A sort of state of the land, once the land is chosen.
Once we've seen its different characteristics, have chosen the first perimeter of our land development, we can then begin to prepare a diagnosis of the zone.
Now the diagnosis is made up of questions which might be... questions of climate, the sun, here we have rain falling.
This is the data to take into account, the climate, the microclimate.
Another important piece of data is the nature of the land.
We have geological strata marked here, what type of land we have, what type of drainage one might have here on the surface.
Naturally the water will flow in the direction of the slope, and then we have nature, the flora and fauna.
So this is important to know, are there species to be protected?
Now, the second part.
Here we are not in cutaway, but on the plan.
It is what exists. Is there already an infrastructure of roadways which leads here, if I consider as my development zone this one?
OK, and then are there water and electrical networks that can reach here?
We also ask ourselves the question, to know what are these lands, the nature of the land adjacent to it.
Next phase, the topographical survey of the zone.
We'll use a scale of 1/1000 to 2/1000, and will imagine a scale of 1/500, which is far more precise, with far more details, but far more time-consuming to survey, and we'll ask ourselves if it's reasonable or not to spend so much time in preparing a plan at a scale of 1/500 when often 
1/1000 or 1/2000 would be sufficient.
Now, let's assume we've chosen this zone here, and let's review its different points. perhaps the group of buildings doesn't serve us at all, in this case, while blocks would allow us to use, as a start, the roads which already exist.
We'll also highlight the forested limits,
We'll look at water.
We'll highlight everything that's on the site, and then we'll make level curves at 1 meter, 1.5 meters, 2 meters, in relation to the nature of the land.
We'll also of course highlight any large trees we find.
The large baobabs, for example, which must be preserved, and any element worthy of protection, which is cultural or non-cultural, which is part of the cultural heritage, we'll highlight very carefully.
After this, we'll determine the size and shape of the parcels.
The size and form are influenced by social conditions, societal, by the nature of the land, by the building conditions, we'll review all of these different aspects one after another, beginning with...
Lifestyle.
Why lifestyle?
Because we can clearly see that we have very, very dense parcels, like this, and we won't have the same relationships between neighbors as those where the parcels are very loose, with large streets dividing them.
So here we won't see the same lifestyles as we would here.
Why lifestyle too?
Because if I want to design a shared parcel, shared equipment and facilities, surely I will need to put all my islets, and we're speaking, of course, of islets, around, because it is very, very clear that they are directly connected to here.
It's not the same thing under another plan where I have my parcel here, and the islets I'll develop only there.
So we have a social structure which influences the size of the parcel, for we are not building for the same family, if it's made up of seven or eight people per household, or of four, as in South Africa. 
We were in Senegal, before.
So this can determine the size chosen for the parcel in regard to the social structure of the family.
The building techniques are not at all the same.
We can easily see that in the case of this neighborhood here or this type of habitat, the construction techniques, the status or the building norms also define the middle-sized parcel if we want this type of building or this type of habitat, we'll of course have, here, parcels which are bigger than these small, individual parcels over here.
The nature of the parcels.
We're speaking of the residential, which is the case we'll find here.
These are the blocks, as you see, different residential blocks, and then we see that their sizes are not at all the same when it is on an industrial scale or even if all this is, at some point or another, subdivided.
We don't have the limits we might want for land development, but we see these small blocks here, and the large blocks, which are parcels for industry.
Then we have geometric rules.
We can imagine that we have one size, here, which is the minimal.
Beyond that, it becomes really too dense, really too closed in, the people are on top of one another, at the maximum size, which we'll mark here, beyond which the cost of development is such that it's no longer possible to make a cost-effective development.
So the form of the parcel, as we saw earlier, the closer to the street, the less linear infrastructure, the larger, the more needed, but the size of a parcel like this, which is very slim, we can easily see how difficult it would be to build a house or a shack on a parcel such as this, and, finally, the best size is the double square here, a rectangle based on a double square, which allows us, we recall, as we've seen, to return to the plan at the end of the islet.
Next, is of course not to use the square, which is the least rational form we've seen thus far, and then the last shape of parcel, which is the potatoid, or potato-shaped, which in principle is not liked, because it has too many restrictions, but we can imagine, no reason not to imagine, that in the case of the restructurization of precarious zones, we end up with land titles assigned to potato-shaped parcels.
Then, as to size, we can issue rules which give alignments or zones which prohibit construction, which help to avoid building over-dense areas, and we can do this, with public spaces, and we can do exactly the same thing between two parcels, saying that it is not permitted to build at less than 3 meters, less than 2, less than 1 meter, or 50 centimeters.
It's a choice, but one of the methods of urban planning that opens up a number of views, opens up proximity or overcrowding, and these are the instruments, the alignment plans which will be used relatively often.
The same with sectioning, we can imagine that the relation between public space, here, and construction is a maximum height, or a minimum height, and that if we section here, between neighbors, which will have a maximum height of x meters or of x floors, which keeps us from building a 50-story building next to a very small house.
Finally, and certainly of great importance, the economic conditions of the population who will inhabit the development.
Whether low-income or high-income, we must take into account the revenues and the possibilities that families or households have to purchase a parcel.
So the size of the parcel will depend on the revenue of the household.
Same with the nature of the site.
It is also very important with sloping land, in regards to the morphology of the site, that parcels are designed so that they are not exactly the same, whether rectangular or potato-shaped, as a function of what one has.
Finally, we must determine the types of zones of the development, the most classic being that of habitat, but also zones for small business, retail zones, socio-educational zones, and public domain, green zones, as we'll see in detail next.
Here is an example of a development where we can clearly see a market, so we have a first zone, which is a market area.
Here we have green spaces, perhaps either flood zones or unbuildable, which is our second zone.
Then we have all the unallocated zones, which will clearly be habitat zones, a transformer, electric, perhaps, and then between these habitat zones, what remains is public domain.
So we see only by chance, here also most likely a small business unit.
In a simple development we already see this group of zones, as described.
Now, perhaps we lack a school, a clinic, or athletic fields, but we see that any development will incorporate these zones.
To finish with these different zones, we have the question of percentage.
In principal, residential zones should be at least 50%.
You'll find in certain developments a much higher percentage, because we count the surrounding roadways as 20% of the orders of magnitude.
Here we have 70% roadways plus habitat, with 30% spanning these different zones, which might be commercial, social, recreational, or green spaces.
It is very important to maintain this 30%, but often what we see is that this 30% drops to 10%, because of equipment, and what makes our 50% becomes 70%.
Inevitably, the more residential zones, the more assignable zones, and the more land to sell.
And if I'm no longer in business, this lowers the parcel price of my development.
But let's try today to say that it's 50%, neither more nor less, which is residential, the rest in roadways, green spaces, shared spaces.
So we must establish a development program.
To do this we ask the question of how many people will live in it?
It's A.
B.
The number of people per household.
And then, the number of parcels needed.
It's simple. A divided by B.
And once I get the number of parcels, which I then multiply by the average surface area of my parcel.
We end up with a total of x, and, finally, since I have 50% of residential parcels,
Two times x is equal to the total surface area of my development.
To this we'll add next the question of the equipment program, and we must define what importance we want to give each type of equipment, and which situation we want to give to our development.
So again, for the equipment we have a population, and we have a norm, the number of inhabitants per equipment.
And this will give us the number to create.
So we have a surface for equipment, and we know the surface necessary.
Next we'll try to adapt our development to the topography.
If I position myself like this, with my roadways, we'll very quickly have problems, because the speed of the flow perpendicular to the slope will be huge, and we'll have problems of soil cutaway here, and of flooding of the housing.
To remediate this, there are many techniques.
We can erase and begin again.
First, instead of making wide streets like those we've just made, we'll make them staggered, which allows us in this way to achieve flow speed which is notably less.
So the water cannot flow directly as we had before, but is, at each point, broken, and as a result, this slows down the water speed, as well as the risk of land cutaway.
Another way might be instead of perpendicular, like this, which is to say at a slight slant in relation to the slope.
There too we can imagine that the water will flow at a much slower speed, gently descending, while before it went directly, straight.
And if we couple these last things we've done, which is to say that in breaking up of the slope, we find ourselves in situations where the development becomes something which might be like this, and the question we must then ask is if it is pertinent or not to have these angles here, instead of right angles.
So we must at the same time choose between a perpendicularity in the creation of the road, and, ultimately, the design of the roadways which allow the water to flow gently.
The choice must be made, and is, without doubt, an intermediate situation where we'll end up.
Next, nuisances.
Nuisances might be noise, are often related to noise, right?
We'll avoid spending too much time on nuisances.
Another one might be the wind.
If my residential areas are here, the dominant wind like this,
I'll avoid putting my industrial zone here because the pollution will land there, so instead I'll put it here, so the wind blows across the residential area and then over my industrial zone, without bothering anyone.
The same for the sun.
If we have a slope, and residential areas.
The question is, depending on the latitude, to protect it from the sun or, on the contrary, to seek exposure to it.
The eleventh stage of our step-by-step is the question of service.
Now of course, when speaking of African cities, in most cities, the rate of car ownership is very low.
We have, for example, 17, 20, 25 or 30 vehicles per 1000 inhabitants, while in those countries, let's call them industrialized, we might have up to 500 cars per 1000 inhabitants.
So the question of purpose is certainly important.
But we must keep these numbers in our heads, there is a very small elite who are able to get around by car.
But even in a situation such as this, we have the same thing in the poorest neighborhoods.
So we cannot economize in service by cars.
We must imagine that cars are exclusively in public spaces.
That there are no parking spaces, or very few, on private space, on one's own parcel.
So the public space must at the same time manage the circulation as well as the parking of vehicles.
And then, as we can see in this image, we can easily see that we must also plan ahead, in our templates, for these types of situations where the street ends up so torn up, in such a sorry state, that it cannot support this narrow a roadway.
A much wider one is necessary, so that cars can easily circulate.
So the template of service is not only tied to the number of vehicles which will circulate, but equally to the conditions of the road and the climatic conditions of the city.
Let's consider, finally, other infrastructures.
Which plan to adopt?
A linear plan, a mesh plan?
A mesh plan will be more expensive, will demand more pipelines, but when there is an outage here or there, the system continues to supply water to everyone, while with the other plan, if we cut it here or there, an entire sector of the population will no longer have access to water.
The next step is to estimate the costs of development.
Quickly, of course the point, the land, its purchase.
Second point, the work in situ, which is, of course, the preparation of the land, the roadways, drinking-water supply, electricity.
Third, the off-site, so each time we are here, B, here, C.
The fourth point, equipment.
Fifth, the studies and supervision.
And sixth the diverse and unexpected.
Finally, the price of the development, the cost of its development.
Now we're on points A through F.
Once we have this cost, we have the cost of development, as we've just seen.
Next we have a surface, of the development.
To keep in mind.
Then the assignable surface, or that which can be sold, the habitat, and this, as we've seen, is around 50% of the surface of the development, and which gives us a cost per square meter of land, which, if we want parcels of 150 square meters, will give us the unit-price of the parcel.
Let's not forget to say that the cost of development varies as a function of the standards or the norms applied to it.
If it is affordable or luxury, if we want the road paved throughout or just stabilized earth, if we want strong equipment coverage or not, if we want electrification, if we want individual water distribution or not, so all these things enter in and form the costs of development, directly linked to the choice of building class, low or high-end.
The surface of the development, as we saw earlier, and then the assignable surface, which should be 50%, and then you can without hesitation give a per-parcel cost for 150, 200, 
300, 400, 600 square meters.
There are parcels much larger still, as we've seen.
Remember, in terms of cost, we must also take into account, when there is an international investor, the exchange rates.
We must also take into account inflation, cost increases, because from Day A, when you submit your development sketches, to Day Z, when you've finished your work, you'll realize that many years have passed.
And given the inflation in certain countries, it's important to be cognizant of this inflation in the costs of your development.
