Next in our restructuring of shantytowns, resettlement.
Now, what are the main principles of a resettlement?
The households situated on rights of way will have to be moved, this is inevitable.
But, we'll make sure to minimize this move, to make it the shortest distance possible.
We'll resettle these people as close as possible to their original homes.
The resettlement zone must provide conditions which are similar, even better, but certainly not less.
In the case we're studying, the people we're resettling will have a land title, so their condition will surely improve, which means that we'll find the mechanisms which allow us avoid the systematic resale of parcels.
If you resettle someone, and give them the title to the land, there is a possibility, a very strong probability, that the parcel will be quickly resold so that its owner can return to their old neighborhood or elsewhere.
So we'll avoid this type of model, and to do this the land title will not be issued right away, but instead, at the beginning, housing permits.
The plan which we've just seen, the plan of allotments for the settlement zone.
We have here, on the plan, several thousand parcels which are ready for those who we'll resettle.
Another plan, which was the first.
We see that between the first and last version, there are a certain number of choices which were made, and a certain number of simplifications, because we had zones of lots here, designs for lots which were a bit more complex.
The resettlement, the zone, we have an existing area, here, and then the zone there, which we can barely see, which is the zone where the people will be resettled
Again, a totally empty zone.
The global plan, as we've seen, is the one which interests us today.
So before implementing a resettlement we must first conduct a census, and develop a plan of action.
We have to know who we are displacing and how we will displace them.
To do this, we'll conduct a census of all of the inhabitants, issue questionnaires, visit the site, and photograph the households, each time with a code number so that we can quickly locate them.
This number has an identifier which can also be found on the facade of the shack we are dealing with.
Next, after this step, we'll issue information and compensation.
The people have the right to know what rights they have, and to seek the money offered to them as compensation.
Next, we will displace the people, with the work yet to be done.
Then, we'll open up the rights of way.
The people who were between this limit and this one in this central zone, were displaced, and displaced with only their shacks.
So we've just moved the shacks.
But this time, on the lands which are marked with boundary markers.
We've seen that there was a preliminary allotment plan, that there was a land survey, and then all the boundary markers were placed, and the homes readied to welcome their inhabitants.
At night. 
We've installed electricity, of course, public lighting, not everywhere, but we can see that there are improvements over the previous neighborhood.
The construction of certain facilities, whether schools or markets, roadways, electricity.
And here the people, little by little, are building with concrete.
We will see later, thanks to a habitat program.
Septic tanks were placed throughout.
On each parcel a septic tank was built,
On the 2,300 lots, the necessary 
2,300 septic tanks were placed.
2,300 lots, each measuring 
120 square meters.
Why 120 meters?
Because we have a certain number of people to displace and resettle, and, ultimately, this corresponded to a size of 120 square meters, which was smaller than the norm, which is 180 square meters, but there was no other solution for the resettlement of these people near where they lived before.
So, either we reduce the size, which allows them to be in a settlement zone near their previous home, or we adopt the larger standards, but that would mean that they are displaced much further.
There the choice was clearly made to leave the people where they were.
Now another image, of the same zone, with a mosque and the stores needed for everyday life.
The outcome is very positive, but pay attention.
Know the limits of this positive outcome.
We've bettered the living conditions of approximately 50,000 people, which is extremely positive.
The people are beginning to form part of their neighborhoods.
We will see in the images that this area is now integrated in the city.
It is no longer a ghetto, but a city neighborhood.
We've minimized the displacements and the resettlements, which is very good.
And all of that was done in a very pragmatic way, but keeping close to the idea that we had to minimize to the maximum the impact.
Now there are, of course, negative aspects.
One of the biggest negatives is that the more success you have with these types of operations, the greater the politicization, and the politicization of those actions which should have remained as the basis of these "technical" measures.
Another negative aspect is that these are operations which are extremely costly, and it's not certain if the states or the cities have the means to carry out these types of operations for all of the shantytowns in their countries.
So it serves well as a prototype, as a showcase, but it is extremely difficult to carry this out for all shantytowns.
On this image we see the limit.
The lot allocation plan has a form a bit like this.
We are there, in the process, little by little, of "hardening," while here we are in its initial stages.
Just these few roadways have been opened up, here, and those who were here have come to settle in this zone.
Looking at the time, how it has passed, we can clearly see the part still remaining, of the shantytown, we are already there in the lot allocation plan, and return to the lot allocation plan which was like this one.
But we will see that, little by little, by 2005, 2008.
Look at this zone here, we can hardly see it anymore.
2009, and we are in the situation in which we are today,
2012 still, where finally the area has fully become a city neighborhood, and we realize that the structure of precarious habitat, as it existed previously, has totally disappeared.
One last image.
This one, from 2013, with no trace of the old area.
So there it is. 
We've restructured, resettled.
Now we must develop a habitat program, so that the people can transition from their homes of tin and wood, for these are the homes which we've displaced.
We didn't destroy the shacks, disassemble the shacks, but simply moved them a few hundred meters, reassembling them in the settlement zone.
Subsequent to this, a program entered, called Twize, which allowed people to obtain a sturdy home, of cement blocks, to have a module.
We'll see more on this in the next video.
