We continue on our journey on the restructuring, the resettlement of our precarious zone, to arrive now at the habitat program, which is called the Twize Program, which was put in place by the NGO GRET, with, as its main collaborator, the Mauritanian Commission on Human Rights,
Against Poverty, and for Insertion.
Its goal was to design a program of around, I believe,
7,500 modules within Nouakchott, of which 2,300-2,400 would be in the zone which we'll discuss today.
The module is a simple one.
It's one room, concrete, measuring 
4 x 5 meters, 20 square meters.
There is a whole process which allows the financing of this type of thing.
There will be access to microloans, the residents will pay month after month to have access to their dwelling.
They must make a down payment, often the money they'll put is that which they've received as compensation for their resettlement.
They were displaced; they were compensated for this, and it provided them with money for their down payment.
Then, each month, they'll pay interest, and the restructuring program will play a significant role in subsidizing it.
So even though they pay interest, they will have their house, their room, cheaper than if they had built it themselves.
That's the end goal, as well as to strongly subsidize it, so that it will be extremely attractive.
A few images, here's a plot.
We see the part in concrete and the one that remained, built with flimsy materials.
We find this situation, materials such as boards and fabric, with children playing, and goats and dogs, and the goal is to provide access to durable housing.
Here again we see a house made of wood, and behind it the construction of a home, built of concrete blocks.
The end result is this, where we see how each dweller has made a small decoration around his door, and around the roof's parapet.
There are still some traces of resettlement, as we saw in the previous video, in which each family was identified by a number, and each shack was identified with the same number, which is what we see in this new neighborhood, since they simply moved the shacks.
Another example with, here in front, the latrine, built on the plot when the house was already finished.
An image from the neighborhood where we still find both new and old buildings.
The program had four axes, but the two which interest us here are housing programs, access to housing.
There is a whole process which enables people to build their homes, and then the access to microloans, to financing for these homes.
One cannot exist without the other,
If we have just a housing program with laborers, materials, that's not enough, since the people will not only lack the means to access it, but it will also require a financial process to facilitate their access to this durable housing.
There are three types of population, those who cannot access the program.
Why? Because they are too poor,
They are indigents, who have neither a down payment, nor the possibility to pay interest, so they are excluded from the program.
In any event, each time you make a housing plan, there will be people who won't have access to it, even if it's strongly subsidized.
Their poverty level is such that they will not have access to these programs.
So for them, there is a double sense of marginalization.
They were already poor and marginalized, but now even more so because, compared to their neighbors, who have been able to access the housing program, they were not.
The second, those who adhere to the program, in the end they have no other choice.
They have no other way to do it.
The interest on a loan remains an extreme burden.
It is for 36 months in this housing program.
So for 36 months, they will have to have an extremely important load, which is the interest payment and a part of the amortization.
And, finally, those who simply don't want to take advantage of the housing program.
They simply have the means to do otherwise, so they don't understand that there is a subsidy that would allow them to pay less.
For them, for those of some means, they buy the material, they build as they're able, but they don't own anyone anything; they have no interest to pay, and they can manage things their own way, as they wish.
Why show these three types of population?
To show that when one develops a habitat program, or whatever type of program, one can't reach everyone.
There are those who you'll never reach, because they are indigent, and those who simply don't want to participate, because they have the means to do otherwise.
So we must understand that between these two extremes, we have one client, who is captive, because she doesn't have another choice but to go with the program.
We need a large clientele.
We need to study closely the terms of accession.
Because we might find ourselves in situations where the burden on this part of the population is such that she becomes impoverished, and ultimately ends up in worse condition, with a durable house, for certain, but in a worse state financially than when they lived in a house made of wood.
So when developing a habitat program, the questions regarding mobility are extremely important.
We must toss out old ideas, the first being that the poorest are speculators, and that the first thing they'll do is resell their parcel, resell their housing so that they can go and build a shantytown somewhere else.
As we study this question, we realize that things are a bit more complicated than we may have been told, which is to say that those who have lived, in precarious conditions, for 30 years in this neighborhood, dream of only one thing: to live in less precarious conditions.
They are not cold speculators who are only waiting for one thing, because that would be a really bad strategy, for it would mean they'd been waiting for 30 years.
So they are not cold strategists and speculators, but, on the contrary, people who are waiting for their living conditions to improve.
And we cannot deny that, the poorest as well as the richest, may also have residential mobility.
One is not obligated, all one's life, to live in the same place.
There is, in all countries, and there too, divorce.
There are people who leave because they have a job somewhere else, maybe in Europe or the U.S., or in other regions in Africa, or in another part of the city, and they are not there all day, or all week, as we have families who break up and get together, as in all of today's world.
There are deaths, and widows and widowers, who leave for the country, return to their parents' homes, and who ultimately leave, abandoning their neighborhoods.
This residential mobility is not only for the wealthiest, or for the middle class; everyone has residential mobility.
Behind habitat, lest we forget, there is a symbolic value.
For a durable home, we're ready to make sacrifices, because it's better than one made of precarious materials.
It has a symbolic value: 
I have a sturdy home and so
I've achieved a standard of equipment, a standard of housing, that makes me a full-fledged citizen.
So the parcel, per se, the title to the land is not enough.
To have a title, but to a shack made of wood, is not enough to truly belong to the neighborhood, to truly belong to the city, and to be its citizen.
For that we need durable housing.
Now we'll go from the status of the inhabitant of a precarious zone, to the city-citizen, with the possibility of claiming a parcel, a right to the land which one has finally obtained.
On the contrary, we must be a bit careful with the theory which says that durable housing encourages hoarding, allows for the quick development of an economic activity.
Surely this happens to some, but not to the vast majority.
It's not because one has a durable home that one suddenly becomes an entrepreneur, do one's business and get out of misery.
There are always success stories, of course, they exist everywhere, but the vast majority of people have had to make sacrifices in order to pay for their durable home, and once they have made these sacrifices, they have, in any event, no possibility of investing in anything else.
So the relation between economic development, the development of revenue-producing activities and of durable housing, still remains, today, for us to demonstrate.
While dealing with a holistic view of a city, it's habitat, its construction, its housing programs and land tenure, we are obligated to question the impact of these projects on the whole of the city.
The NGO's who work in cities principally go to zones in the urban periphery.
Each NGO goes where there are no other NGO's, which is legitimate, easily understood, to help with water distribution, to help improve living conditions.
Strictly in terms of city-planning, and I'm not speaking of living conditions, but strictly of city-planning, this means that an NGO who assists in a shantytown, or in the distant periphery of the city, where there is no equipment, no infrastructure, the act of helping these populations will settle these populations in their neighborhoods.
And suddenly, these housing programs, these water distribution programs, the work of these NGO's, will contribute to urban sprawl, because it will settle these populations further and further away.
So in terms of urban planning, this is one of the elements which expands urban sprawl even further, is the role of the NGO's which settle populations in conditions or in zones where they should absolutely not be settled.
In terms of urban planning, it's a disaster, because one can never manage this urban sprawl.
In terms of living conditions, we all agree when we say that their work is necessary, and useful, for it allows one to better one's living conditions.
But we must reflect on these large projects, on the daily work of the NGO's in zones, with a broad view.
We must view this globally, for the entire city.
And there are certain programs which should be avoided altogether, because they plan for the construction of durable housing in areas which are very, very remote, which only makes matters worse.
Finally we have the problems of bringing in electricity, water, and in the end nothing will be resolved.
In the end we'll leave people in the conditions which, in a few years hence, they are more vulnerable than before.
When we say habitat, we are also speaking of the financing of this habitat, which is a heavy burden, subsidized, but still, they must come up with a down payment, they must pay interest, which is extremely difficult for these populations.
And we've seen certain programs, in other countries, where effectively the people had access to apartments, to housing, but where they also found prostitution increased, the number of children enrolled in school decreased.
Why?
Because it's such a financial burden on the family that they must find other sources of revenue.
Now, in the neighborhood we're dealing with, here, we haven't seen this type of phenomenon, but we might, in other countries, fall into these processes, where the financial burden on a family of having durable housing is such that they must send their children out to work rather than send them to school
Why?
Because they have to pay interest for the housing built for them.
So these are the limits of the system,
We must be really conscious, really pay attention, to make sure that this doesn't occur.
To finish, an image of a neighborhood, one we've already seen, an area without a housing program, and one with a housing program.
In conclusion, there is no miracle recipe, to show us what to do, but we must each time remain cognizant that each action which favors, which improves the quality of life, has also its downside.
There are two sides to every coin, as the saying goes.
But we must always keep in mind the other side of the coin, so that we can analyze it, minimize it.
We're not only on the positive, but must also, when it comes to habitat programs, minimize any negative impact, and ask ourselves, which neighborhood will I help?
And while helping, is the financial burden on the families acceptable or not?
Will it introduce other behaviors, most notably child labor, in order to pay this heavy cost, so that they might live in a home of cement blocks?
We can ask ourselves if it's worthwhile to live in a cement-block house, or if it's better to live in a wooden shack, and go to school.
This is a bit of a caricature, but these are the true questions which we must truly, as planners, ask ourselves, when we're dealing with plans for a precarious zone.
