We already saw the role of ecological monitoring in a particular area  is to get information on its value condition and thereby to asses the impact of management actions of these values over time.
For instance, in Ol Kinyei, a conservancy in Kenya one of the values is the migration of wildebeest from the mountain to the nearby Mara ecosystem.
This is a value that matches
a single species: the wildebeest.
In the same conservancy, another value is the Acacia forest that we can see here and this time, the value matches a habitat as a whole.
It is clear that monitoring these two values 
 calls on different criteria.
This is why we will look at which criteria
 can characterize the values.
This is what we call
 key ecological attributes.
A key ecological attribute is shaped by the vital characteristics of a value's ecology.
. By identifying these attributes
you can describe the value and measure its viability.
Ecological attributes are based on some fundamental
 ecological concepts.
To make it simple, we can say that there are 3 main categories of ecological attributes which characterize species and their habitat.
The first one is the size of the natural habitat or the abundance of the considered value  under territory. 
For instance, the number of elephants present 
In the Maasai Mara Reserve.
The condition of the value, the structure of the population and the interactions
that exist between individuals such as the compatibility between the number of predators 
 and the density of preys
 within a park.
Finally, the context in which the value involves.
This includes
the ecological processes that can contribute to maintaining
the presence of this value such as the flood, the pond, the fire regime, or the connectivity for species moving from one habitat to another.
After having identified the ecological attributes, for each value, you simply need
to determine which ones are key for its survival in the long run and consequently important to include in the ecological monitoring
 process.
Taking the example of a tree, the best way to check its health will be by assessing the numbers of flowers produced per year rather than looking at its size because it can grow slowly actually.
But even if these attributes
are describing the values they are often too vague to be assessed effectively and at low cost.
Hence the necessity
to define indicators that will give us information regarding the state of the attributes over time.
So roughly, an indicator can be a measurable characteristic of the ecological attribute, for example, the total number of adults of a population of impalas.
This indicator can also
 be an aggregation
of several characteristics of an attribute combined n only one index.
For example, the evolution of a forest's canopy, the top of the trees can be measured by the number of species encountered.
So, choosing a good indicator to characterize the ecological attributes is key to the success of the monitoring, this isn't an easy task though.
So let's list some elements to defining a good indicator: 
They need to be measurable, in a quantitative or qualitative way by procedures giving reliable, repeatable and precise information.
They need to be predictable over time, meaning the indicator should have the same meaning for everybody at all times.
They should be specific, so the indicator is always associated with said ecological attribute in a non-ambiguous way, and is not affected by other factors.
The indicator has to be noticeable should vary significantly in response to the variations of the threats or actions we engage. to conserve it. 
It has to be swift and able to rapidly detect the changes of the ecological attribute so that taking the appropriate
management measures on time is possible.
It needs to be easy to collect and not require several operators or pricey materials, in the best
 cost-effective way of course.
Finally, it should facilitate the communication of results, and therefore be easy to understand
in order to allow the public to better get the situation of the protected area through its attributes.
Once the indicator is identified, the first step will be to determine its current state which will serve as baseline condition.
Then, define the desired state
you want to achieve for this indicator. 
This will enable the analysis of results of the ecological monitoring in view of the baseline condition of the values, and the conservation goals or for each of them.
Obviously, there will be a certain fluctuation of the indicators within an acceptable area.
This is what we call the acceptable level of variation of indicators. 
Thanks to these variation
thresholds, we can determine what managers deem to be the normal level of change of the considered value, and thereby to define what level of alteration of the ecological attribute will be deemed too severe and need an action plan then.
The acceptable level of variation also defines the level of restoration of the ecological attribute when needed.
As you can see, it's rather simple.
The steps to follow are first to identify the key ecological attributes of each value.
Then, to select
the relevant indicators for each attribute and to characterize the baseline condition of the attribute by indicators.
Finally, you need to determine
the acceptable levels of variation of the indicators that will obviously contain the desired state of conservation
 for the considered attribute.
Nothing really complicated,
 just a little bit of methodology.
