We've seen which indicators to assess over time to determine the health of the values by following the key ecological attributes.
In practice how can these assessments be made in the field?
Actually choosing an assessment approach will depend on the ecological attribute to assess and therefore on its ecological characteristics.
For instance, a species that is abundant enough to be detected from afar in the savannah could be subject to an aerial count.
One this approach wouldn't work for: a nocturnal species or one living in a dense forest.
You also need to make sure that the chosen approach is precise enough to carefully detect all the variation of the ecological attributes so the approach needs to have broader detection limits than the range of variation of the attributes itself.
For instance, if you want to assess the evolution of plants on a small area, remote sensing from a satellite image wont be the best solution because of it's low resolution.
The approaches to measure the variation of ecological attributes can be direct, meaning the focus on the attribute itself like the number of individuals of a species for example or they can also be indirect and in this case focus on the variable connected to the attribute like the number of tracks on the ground or the nest or the damages on the tree or the droppings, et cetera.
Imagine you want to measure the concentration of chimpanzees in a park. Are they living in dense forest where it is difficult to see them through the leaves?
It is better to count their nests which are much easier to detect.
So the nests are in this case an indirect indicator of the presence and the number of chimpanzees.
We see here that the choice of a suitable approach requires good knowledge of the ecological attributes in question.
It is thus not relevant to choose an approach only because the managers are used to using it if it does not allow to properly measure the variations of the attribute.
The monitoring results would be unusual and the time span to set it up will be most certainly wasted.
Whatever the approach, the collected data can be qualitative meaning they are of presence/absence kind or classified in categories like rare, occasional, frequent, abundant, et cetera.
They can also be quantitative.
For example, the number of individuals or tracks in a specific area.
Quantitative data are precise but generally require creative thought to collect.
And that's not all.
The method used for counting should be the most reliable in measuring what we want in view of the context of the protected area itself.
So it's important to choose the method involving the least bias.
For example, if you are looking to estimate the density of antelope in a park, you could count from the ground by foot, by car or by overflying the zone in low altitude.
If you are in a park where poaching is a problem, an animal runs away as you get closer counting directly from the ground may be difficult since the animals will run away before you have time to see them.
Aerial counting would be, in this case, the most suitable because it allows for the detection of animals at a greater distance.
Bias can occur at different levels.
It can be linked to the observer who makes mistakes when identifying a species or estimating the size of a group of the species for instance and it can also be linked to the monitoring conditions like bad weather that can affect the quality of observation during the collection of data in the field.
Bias can also be connected to the type of habitat.
In zones with dense vegetation identifying certain species will be more difficult.
We saw that for the chimps.
It can be connected to the time of the day or year because some species are active or not and therefore visible or not only at certain times.
This needs to be taken into account in the protocol.
Finally, you also need to understand that some biases are inevitable and it's important to estimate whether or not they are likely to have fact effects the validity of the final results of ecological monitoring.
So beforehand you need to identify all the possible sources of bias in order to attempt to control or reduce them if possible.
