A complete ecological monitoring protocol implies value, ecological attributes, indicators to assess the attributes but also a data collection method and a sampling plan that are effective, precise, realistic, feasible, unrepeatable over time whoever the people involved in it's implementation may be.
Now the question is can all this be done in view of the available resources within a protected area?
So let's see what resources are need to implement such a protocol.
A data collection method comes with specific equipment for the collection process, storage and data analysis.
Sometimes staff needs to be trained specifically to be able to use this equipment properly.
The monitoring process will consequently have a cost in purchasing and maintaining the equipment but also in the time spent training the staff in charge of collecting and analyzing the data.
For instance, buying your GPS or camera trap generates an expense of a couple of hundred euros per device to which the battery, the transfer and data processing software need to be added.
This can seem a detail for certain parks but it can also be too expensive orders where simple maps are still used for localizing the area of observation.
It's not very precise, indeed but of course it's also, it cost's almost nothing.
Training the staff can be a rewarding role but it can sometimes be useless.
It is a case when trained agents are transferred before having the opportunity or the time to particularly apply their knowledge.
Finally, and this is important.
You need to check if the staff have the ability to fill in the sheet properly or to implement other way of reporting that are adapted to the observer's level.
As for the chosen sampling plan, it will determine the number of data collecting campaigns to do in different places as well as their frequency during the year, for instance.
This will have a cost in working time, travelling, mobilizing vehicles, logistics, et cetera.
For instance, the table shown here compares the sampling plan of
3 different approaches to monitor the birds during breeding season.
The contact point approach is the least time consuming over the year. It's about 8 hours of work but also the one giving the least detailed results.
This approach will be most adapted in places with few staff at hand to collect data or if the dense vegetation prevents access to certain key sampling sites that would be required when using the tools or approaches, the grid plan and the transect plan.
The cost of an ecological monitoring protocol as a time factor and can have an outsourced expertise cost if there is a need to implement some specific monitoring steps that the protected area staff itself wont be able to do alone.
To guarantee it's long-term sustainability, it is however better for the ecological monitoring to be done by the manager himself along with his properly trained staff.
If the ecological monitoring protocol is clear and unique the manager will be able to do all the sampling, data collection, data analysis procedures himself and this contributes to the global strengthening of the park's capabilities.
In short, you need to choose a protocol that matches the available human and financial resources in a protected area in the medium haul while making sure this protocol is effective enough to detect indicators to assess with as little bias as possible.
Estimating the monitoring cost should be done while planning and implementing the ecological monitoring process.
