Hello and welcome to this Mooc on the management and the governance of protected areas in Africa. 
This Mooc is a general training course on the way these particular territories are being managed.
It will help us thinking about and better understand their contribution to the conservation of nature on the continent and to the sustainable development of the territories around them, because protected areas are more than fauna and flora reserves.
They also provide resources, goods, useful services to the local populations, and beyond them, to all humankind.
Three key people have contributed to the development of this Mooc and they will coordinate it with me: Sylvie
Goyet,
Paul NDiaye from the Cheikh-Anta-Diop University in Dakar and Paul Ouédraogo from the RAMSAR Convention
Secretariat.
Several other speakers will share their experience through interviews or videos.
Their names will be listed at the end of this introduction and you will soon see them on your screens of course.
So, this Mooc has 7 modules spread over 7 weeks.
Each module contains 6 sequences allowing us to address a specific topic, and reading material is also provided for you to go deeper.
So, depending on your expectations you will have the possibility to go more or less into detail.
At the end of each module, an animation sums up the important points of the week, and an assessment test is available.
It is optional, but if you succeed, you will receive a certificate of achievement.
Those who wish to will be able to take a final classroom exam and get EPFL certification.
We will talk about this during the Mooc, don't worry.
The first module will introduce a few key concepts to really understand what protected areas are: their nature, their importance, their role, their specificities.
The second module will be more specifically about their management: planning, networks, the use of the land around and between the areas, transboundary protected areas.
The third module will be about their governance, a cucial topic: who does what and how to manage those territories.
We will talk about State, communities, private sector etc.
In the fourth module we will cover some of the aspects regarding the areas' effectiveness: surveillance, ecological monitoring, raising awareness among partners and also recognition of good practices thanks to the green list.
The fifth module will cover a few specific aspects of these protected areas: the link with culture for instance, the importance of training, the marine environment, species conservation and also tourism.
The sixth module will be about funding conservation activities in and around protected areas.
We will talk about the economic values (and others) of protected areas, about financial planning, the sources of funding and its mechanisms, compensation and so on.
Finally, the last module will be dealing with topical issues related to African protected areas.
We will talk about climate change, connectivity, ecological restoration, gender and equity, corruption and all kinds of traffics.
Each week, an important international convention will be presented:
The Convention on Biological Diversity and its related agreements like the CITES, the RAMSAR Convention, the World Heritage Convention, and also the Convention on Migratory Species
(CMS).
This Mooc will be the opportunity for us to share our experiences through the discussion group put in place.
We count on you for sharing your opinions and suggestions to improve this course.
Don't wait until the end of the Mooc to talk to us.
All good ideas are welcome.
Finally, I'd like to thank the organisations and people who made this Mooc possible.
We benefit from the financial support of André
Hoffmann, of the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and of the partnership between France and the IUCN, in particular the French Development Agency.
This Mooc is the result of a technical collaboration between the EPFL, the IUCN, the Cheikh-Anta-Diop University and the RAMSAR Convention.
That's it.
Here we go, for 7 weeks that we hope to be fascinating.
Have a great day!
