Welcome to this course entitled introduction to public health engineering in humanitarian context.
My name is Christoph Lüthi and I work for the Swiss Federal Institute of aquatic science and technology, EAWAG, and I am responsible for Sandec, the department of sanitation water and solid waste for development.
I am Javier Cordoba and I am working for the water and habitat training of the international committee of the Red Cross.
A one hundred fifty years old humanitarian organization whose mandate is to ensure humanitarian protection and assistance for victims of armed conflicts and other situations of violence.
The world is facing unprecedented humanitarian needs; we are witnessing an increase in the number of humanitarian crises that tend to be more and more complex and often in urban settings, longer in duration and broader in regional impact.
These humanitarian crises cause intense sufferings, disrupt essential services and put populations at greater risk of infectious diseases.
In order to respond to these challenges and growing needs, well trained engineers and specialists in water sanitation, energy supply, environment and in other related fields are increasingly needed.
This is why the ICRC and EAWAG have decided to combine their expertise and experience to deliver this MOOC which explores the field of public health engineering in the specific context of humanitarian crisis caused by armed conflicts.
We have designed this course for a broad audience.
The main requirement for this course is to be curious and excited to know more about humanitarian engagement and engineering.
You might be a student, a professional or a practitioner already working in the humanitarian sector.
Our wish is that at the end of the course you will be willing to use your engineering and technical skills to contribute to the humanitarian efforts that is so much needed in today’s world.
Let’s have a look at the learning objectives of this five-week course.
After this course, we would like you to understand the link between water, sanitation and hygiene, so-called wash activities and health in order to identify key measures to be taken to reduce the mortality and morbidity due to infectious diseases encountered in humanitarian contexts.
Besides the public health aspect, we would like you also to get familiar with the features of humanitarian response, particularly with the challenges posed by essential services such as water supply, sanitation or electricity during protracted armed conflicts.
Finally in order to be able to define the outline of the humanitarian response in public health engineering sector, you should be able to know the main technologies encountered in the humanitarian contexts.
This course consists of video lectures given by ICRC experts and EAWAG researchers, bringing together years of research and field experience.
In addition we have included a selection of videos from EWAG MOOC series, sanitation, water and solid waste for development which were relevant to the topic of this MOOC.
If you would like to learn more on the series please visit our website.
Finally, in order for you to get an understanding of reality on the ground this MOOC contains real case studies and situations faced by
ICRC engineers in the field.
Let's take a closer look to the syllabus of this course.
In week one, we will introduce you to the topic of public health engineering and see how engineers can have a significant impact to reduce the mortality and morbidity encountering many humanitarian contexts.
In order to do so, engineers should have a good understanding on how infectious diseases are transmitted.
A case study on plague eradication campaign in Madagascar will illustrate the topic of this week.
In week two, we will present the humanitarian contexts in which public health engineering activities take place.
We will see how protracted conflicts affect urban essential services such as the water supply or sanitation, resulting in public health issues.
A case study on Iraq will illustrate this challenge.
Week three reviews water technologies commonly used from the source to the distribution point in order to provide water.
This week will be based mainly on the water technology compendium currently being developed by some Swiss researchers.
Some ICRC case studies dealing with water supply in emergencies will also be presented.
Week four then presents a sanitation compendium developed by EAWAG that will be illustrated with ICRC case studies related to sanitation challenges in humanitarian context.
In the last week, we will focus on a type of solid waste that pubic health engineers often encounter in humanitarian crisis: medical waste.
Finally, we will discuss the critical issue of behaviour change in emergencies and hygiene promotion.
Given the time available, this course will not be able to provide you with a wide range of details on the different aspects presented.
Our goal is to introduce you to the topics and provide a general overview.
This is why for each week you will be referred to ICRC and EAWAG publications available for free on the internet and the course platform.
In addition, we will also refer you to publications from other organizations.
On behalf of all of the lecturers, have fun learning this MOOC!
We are looking forward to working with you over the coming weeks.
Let's start the course!
