Hi there and welcome.
In this segment we will briefly discuss the different use cases for the Market Opportunity Navigator so you can understand if this is applicable to your own situation or dilemmas.
The Navigator offers a structured process to support your market opportunity choice.
It can be applied in many business situations by different types of users.
Probably the most important point to begin with is that you can apply the three steps of the Navigator according to your own needs.
Although we portray the Navigator's process in a stage manner, is actually possible and sometimes even more useful if you apply the navigator in a different order or simply use the individual parts according to your specific questions or dilemmas.
It is also possible to start the process from different entry points depending on what you already know and what you have already decided.
For example, you may use the navigator to compare potential market opportunities but not to generate alternatives or to build a smart portfolio around the target market opportunity that you already pursue.
Other than that, the navigator is suitable for different types of entrepreneurial beginnings.
Some firms start with the intention to address a specific market need.
This approach is typically called
Market Pull.
If your firms and falls in this category you will find great value in applying the market opportunity navigator because it allows you to evaluate your initial target market.
If this proves to be a worthwhile opportunity you can then build an Agile Focused Strategy around it.
If it turns out to be a weak opportunity the navigator will assist you in discovering more valuable options.
On the other hand, some firms may start with developing a technological invention and search for potential uses for their technology, they are typically called
Technology Push Firms.
If your film falls in this category you will find great value in applying the navigator because it allows you to discover possible market opportunities to evaluate them and to develop your Agile Focus
Strategy.
But the navigator is not only useful for setting your initial market entry strategy.
In fact, finding the right direction for your run is a difficult question that bothers entrepreneurs and innovators not only as they choose their initial path, but also overtime as they strive to pursue it.
Because things may constantly evolve and new parameter may require additional attention.
So with the navigator you can capture your ongoing learning and update your situation effectively.
It allows you to trace back, track and update your decision.
If strategic changes are required you will see them more easily.
It will also come handy when pivoting is required.
If you hit the wall and need to recalculate your route the navigator will assist you in discovering evaluating and choosing your new strategy.
Lastly, running in the right direction is also a relevant question when it's time to grow your business.
Whether you are still a startup or a larger enterprise the navigator will be useful as you search for your next pathway to success.
Because the navigator is valuable not only for a setting your initial strategy but also over time as you grow and evolve.
It is suitable not only for startups but also for well-established firms.
Startups that face an inherent uncertainty usually struggles to find their path to success.
They need to focus on pursuing the most valuable opportunity on the one hand, and to hedge their bets on the other and all with limited resources.
The navigator can guide entrepreneurs to do just that.
It will help them to identify and map their options and to choose a path that can lead them to success.
As for established firms they often struggle to create the most value from their existing assets and to identify opportunities for new growth.
The navigator will help establish firm to identify the next
BIG thing and to manage their innovation funnels smartly, so that their entrepreneurial endeavors are better positioned for success.
In addition to small and large firms there are other types of users that can find the navigator valuable for their needs.
First, technology transfer offices that attempt to commercialize innovative technologies stemming from their laboratories can use the navigator to find potential applications and customers for these inventions.
Second, investors that are constantly looking for promising businesses can use the navigator as a screening tool to evaluate the attractiveness of an opportunity, and if it proves to be interesting to encourage the development of a smart portfolio around it.
Third, educators and accelerators that attempt to accompany budding entrepreneurs can use this business tool to clearly lay out all the major considerations of this important process and to enrich the toolbox of their trainees.
To summarize, identifying, evaluating and exploiting new market opportunities is core to creating significant value for anyone who is dealing with commercializing innovations.
The navigator can therefore be applied by different types of users and also at different phases of the venture.
Starting with the initial strategic conception and accompanying managers overtime whenever they need to change, adapt or advance their