My name is Dr. Charles Niwagaba and I'm a senior lecturer of sewer engineering at Makerere University,
Kampala, Uganda.
I have 16 years experience in sanitation.
Now, faecal sludge management is a new and quickly evolving field.
In this module we present you a video, so that you can visualize some of the realities of urban sanitation.
Lean back, enjoy and please keep in mind the learning objectives while viewing. 
Following this module you will be able to understand weak links of urban sanitation. 
Name potential solutions that the
U-Act and FaME projects identified in order to improve urban sanitation.
Discuss the benefits that resource recovery can have in terms of faecal sludge management. 
Adequate sanitation can only be fulfilled with management of the entire service chain.
Including safe access to clean toilets collection an transport of accumulated faecal sludge followed by treatment and some form of safe end use or disposal.
U-Act is taking place in Kampala, Uganda.
Where in poor areas 84% of the households rely on shared toilets.
Such as the one shown here. 
These toilets are used on average by 25 people each. 
But sometimes by up to 500 people each.
When toilets are overused it is less likely that they are kept clean.
This resulting in people stopping to use them.
And resorting to open defecation. 
Considering cleanliness U-Act research has identified that up to 4 households can actually share a toilet while maintaining it in an acceptably clean and functional manner.
And thereby provide affordable and adequate sanitation.
Inadequate toilet facilities are affecting life in informal
 or illegal settlements. 
The faecal management enterprises or FaME project lead by Sandag is taking place in Dakar, Senegal
Akrogala and Kampala, Uganda.
And starts where U-Act leaves off with accumulated faecal sludge onsite sanitation technologies.
The goal of the FaME project is to increase sustainable access to sanitation thorough resource recovery from faecal sludge.
Which could provide revenue to improve collection, transport and treatment services. 
Many households cannot afford to have faecal sludge collected and removed.
Once onsite technologies become full.
For example, in poor areas of Kampala this costs between
23-46 US dollars. 
Which is 15-35% of an entire household's monthly income.
Even if households can afford the collection service, the toilets are often located down narrow pathways and are not accessible to vacuum trucks.
As a result manual laborers are hired to remove faecal sludge with shovels and buckets. 
Sometimes even getting inside the onsite technology to dig out the sludge.
Commonly, manual laborers do not have access
 to motorized transport.
They need to carry or push the faecal sludge away.
As shown here, this results in faecal sludge being illegally dumped either right next to the house, or into drainage canals or water bodies, contaminating the environment with excreta.
If vacuum trucks can access the toilets, they use hoses to vacuum the faecal sludge into trucks.
The U-Act toilets are designed to increase access to collection through their design.
U-Act has designed and constructed
156 shared improved latrines.
These latrines are spread all over the city in about 35 slums.
These toilets consist of a holding tank of 6 cubic meters. 
Which is fully aligned from the bottom.
It is lined so as to prevent ground water pollution because most of the low income areas in Kampala are situated in areas with high water [INAUDIBLE]
And therefore toilets which are not lined contaminate ground water directly.
We have given these toilets additional features
(INAUDIBLE). 
For example, on the site we have got an access point which is covered by a brick that can be easily removed whenever the toilet fills and needs to be emptied. 
The toilet structure standing over here has been there for about two years and in a period of two years it has been emptied about three times.
And this emptying has not affected the integrity of the structure.
And we are very sure that it can be used several times for a long time as long as it is emptied as and when it feels.
Another way to increase access to the collection is to reduce fees at the household level.
Households rely on collection and transport companies.
Which charge high fees because they also incur
 many expenses.
If the profitability of companies could be increased the fees of the households could be reduced.
The collection and treatment of faecal sludge is complicated by the high variability of its characteristics.
For example, faecal sludge from septic tanks that consists of washing, cleaning and cooking water in addition to excreta is very dilute.
Faecal sludge from pit latrines tends to be much thicker.
Well, faecal sludge from public toilets with a high number of uses is collected frequently.
And so is less stabilized.
The sludge often contains hygienic products, batteries, bottles, household waste and garbage which can clog the hoses and damage pipes.
And because faecal sludge is mostly water and water is heavy it's expensive to transport.
Vacuum truck drivers frequently get stuck in congested traffic.
As shown here in Dakar.
And long lines can form at discharge locations.
There are also not enough legal dischage locations or treatment facilities.
And drivers must pay a fee to discharge.
Because of these reasons and the costs trucks often resort to dump untreated faecal sludge directly into urban environments.
If these fees were reduced or eliminated could the savings be passed on to the households resulting in lower fee?
And with this increase the amount of faecal sludge that is delivered to treatment plants reducing the dumping of untreated faecal sludge to the urban environment.
Faecal sludge is higher in organic matter and nutrients.
One way discharged fees could be reduced is if the treatment plant operators could offset treatment costs.
Generating revenue from resource recovery of the energy nutrients and water from faecal sludge.
The FaME project identified that there is currently only very limited use of faecal sludge as a soil amendment in agriculture and horticulture.
And that the market for the resource recovery is largely untapped.
Even if treated most faecal sludge is presently just landfilled or dumped.
FaME also found that in addition to use as a soil amendment faecal sludge has other potential end uses.
These are as a solid industrial fuel, biogas from anaerobic digestion, protein for animal feed from larvae used in treatment,
The market demand for different end products varies greatly among locations based on such factors as the availability of competing products, local industries and their needs, and user perceptions.
Faecal sludge treatment should be designed to meet the demands of local markets, so that the end product produced the highest possible revenue.
This also ensures that treatment plans are not overdesigned wasting financial resources.
Or underdesigned risking public or environmental health.
For example, if the end use of faecal sludge is combustion as a fuel.
Pathogen reduction is much less important than it is when the end use is soil amendment and food production.
But reducing moisture content is a much more important treatment goal
The FaME project focused on large scale markets such as industrial field to ensure reliable and consistent demand and revenue.
In Europe and the US sludge from wastewater treatment is already coincinerated in cement industries.
FaME research found that if this technology could be transferred to faecal sludge to meet the energy demand of industries in Sub Saharan Africa it could generate much revenue as an alternative fuel.
FaME also demonstrated that the colorific value of faecal sludge, which is a measure of its fell potential is comparable to other biofuels that are currently being used.
And it found that the revenues from this end use
could be significantly greater than its use as a soil conditioner.
Dried faecal sludge has not yet been used
 as an industrial fuel.
Prior to uptake by industries pilot scale implementations were needed to demonstrate the feasibility of faecal sludge as a feel to industries.
To address this the FaME project is designed and constructed pilot scale kilns for brick production in Kampala and waste oil regeneration in Dakar.
In both kilns the temperatures achieved by using dried faecal sludge met industry's requirements.
In the brick kiln a temperature of 800 degrees Celsius could be maintained.
And the strength of bricks fired with dried faecal sludge was similar to those produced by brick factories.
Industries have expressed great interest
 in this alternative fuel.
If there's adequate availability.
[INAUDIBLE] treated faecal sludge as a solid fuel to industries requires drying the sludge to around 90% dryness. given if low solid content.
Cost effective drying methods have to be developed to meet the needs of industries.
FaME researched how to improve the effectiveness of drying beds and in Dakar we've experimented with turning the sludge and with greenhouses to decrease the drying time.
And both have reduced it.
Turning the sludge reduces the drying time by around 20%.
This increases treatment capacities at existing treatment plant.
But also new plants need less drying space.
The research findings of U-Act and FaME together have identified innovative solutions to increase access to sanitation at the household and community level.
Shared sanitation facilities can provide adequate sanitation if the maximum number of households is set to ensure clean and usable toilets.
Faecal sludge can be readily collected from onsite technologies if they are appropriately designed.
Affordability of household level services could be increased through revenues from resource recovery.
And designing faecal sludge treatment to meet the specific
local market demand could maximize these revenues.
To insure uptake of these research results sustainable business models and fee structures need to be developed.
And governments need to acknowledge the importance
 of faecal sludge management.
