Ever since we got this machine it hasn't been in good condition.
We had several technicians come to fix it, but they didn't understand.
Until now, we are still looking for ways to repair it we can't find the parts on the market.
That's why it doesn't work.
Since we got it, in 2012, that's when it got here!
The other machine I work with is an old machine and there is a switch that doesn't work.
So I tried to work with it to get he right image.
There is a cooperation between China and Cameroon.
They give us equipment the donations arrive sometimes with the instructions fully in Chinese.
When you can't see a translator if you have a translator he'll translate the language but he doesn't have the necessary technical knowledge, so we very often face this situation, where our engineers do what they can to make the equipment work so sometimes they make mistakes with the plugs and wires we are often face with this is the big issue we have with this type of equipment
These donations of equipment are often second hand devices, not adapted so they'll work for maximum 6 months and obviously with no transparency from the customer service and maintenance team.
Well sometimes it's very interesting stuff very interesting very interesting imagery equipment echograph scanners and unfortunately when it's second hand it won't last very long.
The problem of the obsolescence of the equipment
So the problem is that with these obsolete, outdated machines we sometimes have to repeat the exam 3, 4 or 5 times to get what we want and the final image is approximate, sometimes we accept one because we have already tried many times and there is a double, even a triple risk.
For the patient, who is radiated several times because there is a certain dose the patient shouldn't exceed and for yourself, because at the same time, the personnel is often unprotected, they don't have leaded screens they barely have a leaded apron but that doesn't protect like a screen 
Thirdly, they never have control of the quantity of radiation they recieve.
The machines come as they are. we don't know if there are spare parts and we don't know if we can find them locally.
So you are given a machine.
You don't have it from the start, only for the end
You just receive it and you use it.
When it stops, if you can't find the parts, you put it aside and look for another one.
And as long as it doesn't come you stay like that, so this is the real problem with these machines we receive.
When the machine gets to us the spare parts are no longer made because the machine isn't fabricated anymore.
So this is a huge problem.
We face constraints that we cannot solve and sometimes we are giving up on the machine and not knowing what to do.
They become what you'd call the "white elephant in the room".
There is this big white elephant there everyone looks at it but it does not work.
Sometimes there is equipment we have to pay to get rid of, so the term "donation" could be more like a transfer of responsibility from one to another.
So that is a subject we need to analyse with care and depth.
The donators have good intentions.
But, they give what they have and that can mean what they want to get rid of, which doesn't necessarily correspond which often doesn't correspond to the real need from the field.
Either in terms of what we want, or in terms of reliability,
So they give what they can because that's what they have, and maybe they don't use it any more
And we receive it because they give it to us, bu maybe we didn't ask for it and if we asked for what we really wanted, they would say "we don't have that, take this instead."
There is an inadequacy between what's available when they donate and what we really need.
