The Sun is an active star.
In addition to the 11-year cycle that we talked about before with the change in the number of sunspots under a sunspot group over a period of 11 years, we have on one hand turbulence in most of the surface of the Sun, so we have a granularity of the surface of the Sun.
We have the sunspots,
I mentioned that.
And we also have flares and coronal mass ejections.
Here you see a flare.
It's a bright feature that extends from the Sun surface.
And you see that the size is considerable.
If you have here, the relative size of a Jupiter versus the Sun.
Jupiter is about 1/10 of the size of the Sun and just below Jupiter you have the Earth.
The Earth is about 1/10 the size of Jupiter, so about 1/100 of the size of the Sun.
So you see these features are enormous compared to cold bodies of the solar system.
These are flares: bright features extending away from the surface of the Sun.
Here you see a prominence.
A prominence again, is a bright feature extending from the surface of the Sun. following the local magnetic field,
I mean, all these features are driven by the magnetic field of the Sun.
The Sun is in fact a magnetic star.
It is totally driven in the motion of the particles: charged particles obviously, by the magnetic field.
The prominences are extended away from the surface of the Sun and then reconnecting with the surface.
They follow small loops in the local magnetic field of the Sun.
They are visible also during total solar eclipses.
So they radiate in the visible part of the spectrum.
It's a magnificent view during a total solar eclipse to see the bright features on the surface of the Sun, and the prominences.
Coronal mass ejections are much larger features.
And they don't reconnect to the surface of the Sun, but they extend outwards.
They produce a large flux of charged particles that extends into the solar wind and into the solar system.
They are most of the time observed in the short wavelength part of the spectrum, typically in the ultraviolet, extreme ultraviolet, or even X-rays.
And they really connect the Sun electrically and in terms of charged particles with the solar system.
Here we have large coronal mass ejections seen by SOHO.
SOHO is a ESA/NASA
Sun-observing satellite,
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, located, by the way, on the so called Lagrange L1 point.
So the Sun-Earth system, we'll talk about that later in the course.
SOHO always remains in the same position versus the Earth: about 1.5 million km towards the Sun.
But it tracks the Earth as it goes around the Sun and always keeps the same relative position to the Earth as the Earth goes around the Sun.
So it always has the same view of the Sun, and it also always remains the same distance to the Earth which helps in the communication of the data back to our planet.
Now you have the disk that is occulting the Sun surface itself.
In fact, the white circle represents the Sun itself, the disk is a little bit larger than the size of the Sun in order to occult the lower atmosphere of the Sun.
And here you have huge coronal mass ejections and again, representing a large amount of charged particles flowing into the solar system including towards the Earth.
And you have two views colored differently but the same phenomenon on the left and on the right: huge coronal mass ejections from the Sun seen by SOHO.
This is a videotape of SOHO observations over a period of about 17 days at the end of April and the beginning of May 2000.
The Sun is moving with respect to the stars at about 1 degree per day because it goes a full circle,
360 degrees in one year.
And it follows the ecliptic line on the celestial sphere.
You can see the huge, massive coronal mass ejections
And as we see it the second time,
I would like to point out the plantets that are visible.
We have planet Saturn in the lower left, moving to the right.
Not moving much with respect to the stars because it's so far away.
Then you have the planet Mercury crossing the Sun right now and appearing on the left-hand side.
Just before the end of the clip you'll see planet Venus coming from the right-hand side.
