Now you know about some of the specific pathogens that can cause diarrheal disease, and that most of these pathogens originate in human or animal feces.
Well, there's so many different pathogens that it's impractical to try and measure them all.
So what we do instead is we use indicator species to indicate the presence of fecal contamination.
Today we'll talk about those indicator species and also look at a tool for charting out pathways of transmission of diseases, called the F-diagram.
Finally we'll touch briefly on chemical water quality though it's not a focus of this course.
It would be impractical and impossible actually to directly measure all the different pathogens that could cause diarrheal disease.
So instead we look for indicator species that can show the presence of fecal contamination.
Some characteristics of an ideal fecal indicator are that, it should be something that's universally present in the feces of both human and animals in large numbers.
Those numbers should be higher than the actual numbers of the pathogens of interest.
And the indicator should not be harmful or pathogenic in itself.
It should be something that's readily detected using simple, inexpensive methods, and it should also persist in the environment, or water, in a similar manner to fecal pathogens.
You wouldn't want it to actually grow in natural waters because then you would get misrepresentation.
And finally, if possible the indicator should respond to treatment in a similar fashion to faecal pathogens.
One of the most common indicator species is a bacteria class called total coliforms.
Total coliforms are bacteria that can ferment lactose and produce acid and gas at 35 degrees
Celsius.
There are many different families of coliforms.
Citrobacter, Klebsiella, Hafnia, and
Enterobacter.
And for this reason, total coliforms is not really useful as a fecal indicator, because many of these bacteria have non-fecal sources.
However total coliforms can be useful for operational monitoring to demonstrate for example the effectiveness of treatment or overall cleanliness and integrity in a distribution system.
Thermotolerant coliforms as their name applies can tolerate heat and these are subset of the total coliform class.
Thermotolerant coliforms are what used to be called faecal coliforms, and they can ferment lactose within 48 hours at 44 degrees Celsius.
Feces contain a large number of thermotolerant coliforms, but there are some indications of non-faecal sources of thermotolerant coliforms.
Such as klebsiella and some species of enterobacter.
Also there's evidence that thermotolerance under some conditions can grow or die off in water at ambient temperatures.
So it's not a bad indicator, but it has some limitations.
Escherichia coli, or E. coli, is one specific species of Thermotolerant
Coliforms that is generally agreed to be the most suitable indicator of fecal contamination.
There's some possibility that E. coli might grow in the environment in tropical settings.
And it's only moderately persistent.
So the absence of E. coli doesn't necessarily mean the absence of faecal contamination.
However, on balance, considering all the different ideal characteristics some indicator bacteria, E. coli is considered to be the best available option.
Indicator bacteria are usually reported in terms of the number of counts or colonies in a 100 mL sample.
Many drinking water standards and WHO guidelines are set to be no detectible E. coli or thermotolerant coliforms in a 100 mL sample.
You can consider that water that has higher levels of indicator bacteria, is probably more likely to have, higher levels of fecal contamination.
Though there is not a very clear correlation between indicator bacteria and pathogens on the other hand.
Still water having very high levels of E. coli, more than 1000 counts per 100 mLs
It's probably very risky for consumption.
Water having no detectable e coli in it, however, might not be completely safe because E. coli is relatively less persistent and robust in the environment compared to some pathogens.
For this reason, it would be preferable to combine a measure of water quality, such as an E. coli measure, with some kind of assessment of the system's safety, like a sanitary inspection, which identifies a number of risk factors at a water source.
Then by combining a water quality measure on the vertical axis and a water management measure on the horizontal axis, we can make a risk matrix and prioritize areas, water sources for interventions.
While E. coli or thermotolerant coliforms are the most commonly used indicator species, other indicators might be more relevant for certain purposes.
Viruses travel in the environment very differently than bacteria, so one might want to look at coliphage viruses that required a bacteria host to survive.
As an indicator for viruses.
Faecal streptococci are more hardly robust bacteria compared to E. coli so they could persist longer in the environment and maybe be a better indicator of long term faecal contamination.
Traditionally methods for enumerating
Faecal streptococci have been more complicated.
But this is changing with the development of new methods.
Finally, protozoa can be very resistant to disinfection, to heat, to chlorine, to ozone.
So E. coli is not a good indicator for a treatment efficacy, you'll see.
But some bacteria like Clostridium perfringens or some Bacillus species can form spores which are roughly similar in size and resistance to some protozoan pathogens.
Now the pathogens that we're concerned about, whether they're viruses, bacterial or protozoa, they mostly originate in feces.
But they don't cause health problems unless they are ingested by a new host.
Which means taking them in through the mouth, which is on their face.
So we can think about, how can pathogens travel then, from feces to faces?
And there's a useful learning tool for describing the different pathways.
It's called the F-diagram.
Here's a nice picture of the F-diagram developed by WEDC in Loughburough, the
United Kingdom.
And it's called the F-Diagram because many of the intermediate phases in the environment where a contamination can take place have words that start with the letter F.
So if we start of course with feces, how can we get to faces, well we can go through fluids which is the subject of this course.
And actually the nice thing about this diagram is that you can see what the blue star where the water related pathways are.
So between feces and fluids you have water source protection and after the fluids to the host you have a transport storage and treatment of water.
Besides the fluids, you have fingers, which can directly contaminate fluids or foods or faces.
And also flies, remember the trachoma which is caused by flies landing on faces.
Fields, here, having poor sanitation, is a major risk factor.
And flooding again if there's poor sanitation can lead to exposure to pathogens.
Now let's focus in on those pathways between feces and faces that involve water.
We can think about a safe water chain with different stages where contamination could be introduced.
Contamination could occur at the water resource itself or during delivery to the consumer, fecal matter can also be introduced during the collection and transport of water if the source is outside the home.
When water is stored inside the household it could become contaminated.
And finally the drinking water vessel itself, a cup or a glass might be dirty and introduce fecal matter.
Now let's look at an illustration of these different stages in a safe water chain.
First the water resource itself can be contaminated from contact with human or animal feces.
Surface water often contains faecal bacteria but even groundwater aquifers can be contaminated by inadequately managed sanitation.
Even if the water resources is clean or if water is purified at a treatment plant, it can become contaminated during delivery to the consumer.
For example in a piped water supply, if there is not continuous pressure in the distribution system, contaminated water may enter the pipes through cracks or joints.
Another example though, could be an improperly constructed rising main on a borehole, or suction hand pumps, which are primed with unsafe water.
The point of collection itself can be contaminated.
Think of a communal tap or borehole spout, which is handled and contacted by adults, children and even animals.
And when the point of collection is outside the home, people must use containers which themselves may be dirty.
And people often rinse containers and wipe them with their hands before filling them up, but if their hands are not clean this may not help at all.
The containers must then be transported back to the household giving another opportunity for contamination.
Open containers are especially vulnerable, because it's easy to contact the water with hands during lifting and carrying.
And also dust or insects can enter an uncovered container.
Once the water is take to the household, it is often transferred to another container, and may be stored un-hygienically.
In open containers or on the floor where children and animals can introduce pathogens.
Point of use water treatment at this stage offers the possibility of inactivating pathogens introduced at earlier points in the water chain.
But, even after storage, contamination possibilities exist.
Water may be retrieved from storage containers using an unclean dipper or ladle, especially if the storage container is uncovered.
Finally, the drinking vessel itself, a cup, or a glass, or, perhaps, a gourd, could be full of fecal contamination.
Again, people may wipe the drink vessel with their hands before using it but this might actually the glass dirtier.
So, there are many opportunities for contamination between the original source of drinking water and the actual point of consumption.
A big advantage of household water treatment is that it offers the possibility of removing any contamination that is introduced at the water resource, the delivery system or through collection and transport.
Many household water treatments don't prevent re-contamination so it is important to have safe storage after a treatment step.
And likewise, good hygiene, especially washing hands with soap is important to minimize the possibility of clean drinking water becoming contaminated just before consumption by using a cup or glass that is faecally contaminated.
So in this module, we have talked about different indicators of faecal contamination and how E. coli the preferred indicator bacteria.
We've shown you the F-diagram, which illustrates different pathways between feces and faces, that lead to exposure to pathogens, including through drinking water.
And we've talked about different stages along the safe water chain from catchment to cup.
Where drinking water can become contaminated.
Now in the next module, we'll introduce those treatment technologies for household water treatment and safe storage.
