Let's talk about the radiation on Earth and the Solar System in general.
Obviously, this radiational field is totally dominated by the Sun itself but let's have, first of all, a look at the electromagnetic spectrum.
The Sun is radiating over a very large fraction of this total electromagnetic spectrum.
If we look here in the middle we have increasing wavelength from the left to the right, starting with the Gamma rays, the X-rays, the UV and then we have a very narrow band between about 500 nanometers to about 700 nanometers where we have the visible, and the visible is the part of the spectrum to which our eyes are sensitive.
There's nearly a total transparency of the atmosphere in the visible part of the spectrum.
Then we go to the infrared.
We'll look later at the absorption in the infrared due to molecules in the atmosphere.
Then we have the radio waves beyond about one centimeter, a wavelength for which the atmosphere is, again, transparent.
This is the solar irradiance spectrum.
The irradiance is, in fact, the radiation power per unit surface and per unit wavelength, if we talk about the so-called spectral irradiance.
The total irradiance of the Sun is the total energy that it sends every unit of time or every second on a square meter surface outside of the Earth's atmosphere but if you talk about the spectral irradiance, it's the distribution of these areas of the Sun over the spectrum.
If we look at the spectrum of the Sun, which is in yellow in this figure, we see that we start at about 250 nanometers in the ultraviolet.
Then it peaks at about 0.5 micron, or 500 nanometers.
Then it starts to decrease slowly towards the infrared and the millimeter waves and radio waves.
This spectrum of the Sun, or distribution of radiation intensity of the Sun mimics more or less
5250º Centigrade black body spectrum.
In red, you have the radiation spectrum of the Sun at sea level.
On one hand, you have a reduction due to the fact that you have the albedo.
Part of the radiation from the Sun is reflected back in space, mainly from the upper atmosphere, and you also have a number of dark features or absorption lines, mainly due to the water vapor and to the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
So again, on this figure you have, from UV all the way to the millimeter wave, you have the spectrum of the Sun outside the Earth's atmosphere, the 5250º Centigrade black body spectrum that mimics the spectrum of the Sun outside of the Earth's atmosphere, and you have the reduced radiation on the Earth's surface diminished by the albedo on one hand and by absorption by molecules, mainly in the infrared.
The solar constant is the total solar irradiance on one square meter of a surface outside of the Earth's atmosphere, at the distance that the Sun corresponding to one Astronomical Unit, which is about 150 million kilometers, which is the average distance between the Sun and the Earth.
You see these here, so about 1.4 kilowatts of radiation power on the Earth, now of course, you are closer to the Sun, you have a higher value of this solar irradiance and when you go further away in the Solar System like Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, and Neptune, you have a lower value.
It's important or interesting to see that for Mars, you have about 580 watts per square meter so it's a little less than the solar constant that you have at the level of the Earth but it's still okay to use solar panels on the surface of Mars or for a spacecraft in orbit around the red planet.
The solar radiation still gives you enough power in order to satisfy the needs of electrical power of the onboard system, either of a robot on the surface, or a space shot orbiting the red planet.
Now, there's a definite effect of mainly the ultraviolet light from the Sun on the surface of the satellite and on systems onboard the satellite.
The main effect on the surface of the satellite is a darkening over time of the surface of the satellite.
Typically, if you have a white surface, it will become gray and darker over time.
You have a value of <i>alpha</i> which is solar absorptivity, which is increasing with time due to the impact of the UV light from the Sun.
You also have a degradation in the performance of the solar array due to the UV radiation, and sometimes you can have a local effect on the surface of a satellite causing electrical discharges because of the ionization caused by the UV radiation from the Sun.
