This is the Earth's energy budget.
I will explain the main features of this relatively complex diagram.
On the upper left, you have the solar radiation, the incoming solar energy, which is the solar constant, which is approximately
1368 watts per square meter.
In fact, its value has been slowly decreasing over the past few years and in April 2015, the value was
1361 watts per square meter.
Now, as was mentioned already before, about 30% of this radiation is reflected back in space partly by the atmosphere, by clouds and by the Earth's surface.
We have 20% plus 6% plus 4%, which gives you a 30%.
The rest is getting into land, is absorbed by land and is re-radiated out in space in the form of infrared radiation.
And you have, in fact, seen from the outside and from the Earth, you have two sources of radiation on one hand, the albedo, which is basically the solar spectrum reflected from the high layers of the Earth atmosphere and you have the infrared radiation because the Earth is a hot body about 15 degrees centigrade on the average on surface on the planet, so it radiates in the far infrared.
Now, the Earth's spectral radiance.
This is the radiation power that the Earth is emitting into space, and I am not talking now about the albedo itself, but the self radiation from the Earth.
In a way, you have two components, on one hand you have a 218 K black body and 218 K is corresponding to the temperature of the top of the clouds, so the stratosphere, typically of the order of -55 degrees centigrade which give you 218 K, and through the windows for which the atmosphere is transparent, we have seen our Sun through such windows, then you can see the black body of the Earth's surface, which is at a temperature of approximately 15 degrees centigrade, or 288 K so the infrared radiation from the Earth has these two components, the one that is absolutely steady is the radiation at the top of the atmosphere, but again you can see some radiation from the surface through these windows.
This is a table of the solar flux and albedo for planets.
Again a value that is really of interest for us, is the mean solar flux in watt per square meter, for the Earth the solar constant 1368, a little less now, but it has been the average value over the last few decades and you see that for Mars you have a little less than one half of the value of the level of the Earth, which means that using solar rays for the level of mass is fine.
As soon as you go towards the outer part of the solar system, Jupiter and beyond obviously the solar radiation becomes very weak and you need to have other energy system in a spacecraft than solar rays.
However Rosetta still had large solar rays, when it encountered planet Churyumov-Gerasimenko in 2014 and accompanied the nucleus of the comet on its way to the Sun, but this is an exception.
It was judged as being not the right solution to have thermo-electric generators on board Rosetta, so it was decided to have large solar rays.
But, generally speaking, when we go out in the solar system, to far away distances, we use other power systems than solar rays.
Now, you have interesting values also of the albedo for the planet, we mentioned already about a third or 0.30 for planet Earth.
Venus has a very high albedo, because it is covered with clouds so it reflects a lot of the radiation we see from the Sun.
On the contrary,
Mercury has a very low albedo, because it's a pretty dark body like the Moon and reflects very little of the incoming radiation from the Sun, although it is very close to the Sun obviously so it's a very hot planet.
The large gaseous planets have albedo values of about 0.34.
It's pretty much the same for Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus, which are very similar planets, big giants of gas, mainly hydrogen and helium.
