In this module, and the next one,
I will present the main elements and structure of the CLUES approach.
The CLUES guidelines shown here were published in 2011, together with the Collaborative 
Council in Geneva and UN-HABITAT in Nairobi.
They are available for download from different sites.
Check out the resource section of our course [area] site.
At its core, CLUES is a pretty straightforward planning process that involves seven distinct steps and three cross-cutting issues.
Let's take a look first at the seven planning steps.
In the following, I will shortly go through the six planning steps of CLUES.
Step one begins with process ignition and demand creation.
This is where the community is mobilized and demand is created through a set of different tools.
Step two is the official launch of the planning process, usually in a bigger workshop.
Step three entails the detailed assessment of the current situation, usually put together in a report.
Step four, the prioritization of the community problems and validation.
This can be done in either focus group discussions or in a series of workshops, followed then by step five, the identification of service options.
This includes issues like costs, cost recovery, but also technical options and socio-economic and sociocultural issues.
This can be done in usually one or two workshops that pulls together both experts and community representatives.
Step six includes the development of an action plan, the action plan also put together in a report format.
And then, finally, step seven, which follows after the six planning steps: the implementation of the action plan.
This can be kicked off, for example, with a final workshop.
There are also three cross-cutting tasks.
The first one, and important one, exposure and communication.
This is the constant exposure of the community and its representatives to examples of good practice, to other facilities and pilots that have been built.
Capacity development.
The training and development of skills at all levels, not only at a community level, but also a local authority level.
And then, lastly, the monitoring and evaluation of the plan and the assessment of the progress of the planning approach.
This is separate from the monitoring evaluation of the implementation, which needs its own monitoring plan.
A key concern of CLUES is about clarifying the roles and responsibilities of the different stakeholders involved.
In most countries, this means a mix of civic, or .org, public, .gov, and private, .com-- stakeholders that all have a role to play and need for better arrangements for effective service delivery.
In the case shown here, this could be
NGO, or CBOs involved,
.gov, a utility working at citywide scale, and lastly, .com, the private sector, which also has an important role to play in service delivery.
CLUES is not a theoretical approach.
It's been successfully tested in quite a number of countries, and claim to be the only generic planning framework that has delivered in urban and peri-urban communities.
In the next presentation, we are going to explain the seven planning steps, and provide some examples in how it's been done in Asia and Africa.
