In this lesson we'll talk about asteroid and comet nuclei collision threat with the Earth.
But before we do this, let's have a look at the impact per year on a 1m² plate in low Earth orbit.
This is an interesting graph, that is showing on one hand the meteoroids, or the natural object's curve, of the flux impact per square meter and per year, as a function of the size.
We have, obviously, quite a large number of collisions for very small objects, and we've had some experience with, for instance, bringing back a solar array of the Hubble Space Telescope during the servicing mission in 1993.
And after looking at this solar array, brought back to British Aerospace in Bristol, we could see a number of small impacts due to collision with small meteoroids.
And, of course, you have a mixture in this spot of the graph of natural objects, meteoroids, and orbital debris of small size.
If you look at the larger size, in this area here, you have some contribution of meteoroids, but you still have data that had been recorded, partly by the Goldstone radar, the Arecibo radar, also, showing that orbital debris start to play a role here.
For the size of approximately
1 cm, or 0.10 cm, you have a significant contribution of debris, and, of course, if you look at large objects of the order of 10 cm, or even 1 m, there is a significant contribution of orbital debris.
Now, this data about the LDEF craters and LDEF data,
LDEF is for Long-Duration
Exposure Facility.
This is a spacecraft that was deployed by the Space Shuttle, and stayed a few years on orbit.
It was brought back to Earth, and it was a good witness of the spectrum of the orbital debris and also meteoroid impacts.
So a lot of these data, especially for the small debris, was obtained with the long-duration exposure facility.
This is something that we all fear: the collision on Earth of a large comet's nucleus, or a large meteoroid.
It has happened.
It happens every now and then, and it will happen in the future.
There's one significant event of this nature that happened about 65 million years ago.
This is the so-called
<i>Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction</i>.
A very large meteorite hit the Earth, probably in the region of the Yucatan peninsula, Mexico, and it was such a dramatic event.
It caused real havoc on the surface of planet Earth, and probably caused the extinction of the dinosaurs.
So, 65 million years ago, a significant impact.
The probability of such an event is, of course, very low, but it has happened, and it will happen in the future.
If we wait long enough, it will happen, with a probability of 1.
Now another quite significant event happened in 1908.
There was a large asteroid that hit the Earth, in Siberia, in the region of Tunguska, and caused quite a lot of damage in a forest: there was about 2000 km² of forest that was destroyed.
Fortunately, it happened in an area of the Earth where there is low population density, so to my knowledge there were no casualties there, but significant damage to a forest, and the whole landscape was destroyed.
Another event, that didn't occur on the planet Earth but on planet Jupiter, was the impact of several pieces of Comet Shoemaker-Levy, in 1994.
This was one year after the successful repair of the Hubble Space Telescope, and the recovery of its optical qualities.
This is a Hubble Space Telescope picture showing the impact of one of the large elements of this broken nucleus of the Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9.
You have to remember that the size of Jupiter is about 10 times the size of the Earth, so you can see the scar left by this impact of this large comet object at the surface of Jupiter is about the size of the Earth, or even larger than the Earth.
Another dramatic impact of a meteorite on Earth is relatively recent.
It happened in Russia, in Chelyabinsk, in 2013, in fact on the 15th of February, 2013.
There was a lot of recording of this event by cameras located in cars, and you see here quite a dramatic view of this meteorite that came at a very shallow angle in the atmosphere, and it caused quite a lot of damage.
Its size is estimated to be about 20 m, a mass of about 10,000 tons, so it was a very, very, very massive object.
It caused a lot of damage, and caused injuries also, a lot of broken glass, and this was really dramatic.
And it really indicates that this is something that has happened, will happen in the future, and there's a large effort undertaken now by spacefaring nations to be able to detect early enough such intruders to the Earth, and also we are looking into ways if we can detect such an incoming object threatening the Earth early enough to make a rendezvous with a spacecraft that could possibly cause a deflection of this object and would cause it to miss the Earth.
This is one of the techniques that is being looked at.
Again, if we have a so-called
Near-Earth object, this is an asteroid of a relatively large size that has an orbit relatively close to the orbit of the Earth and every now and then we have a relatively close proximity between such a passing object and the orbit of the Earth around the Sun, and for these objects we could predict early enough, maybe years or even decades in advance, that there would be a really uncomfortable proximity between such an object and the Earth, and a possible collision.
In this case, we could - we are not ready for this yet, but we are looking into ways of bringing a spacecraft in the vicinity of this intruder.
Typically, this is one example of a technique where we would bring a relatively large-mass spacecraft close to the intruder, and early enough, years before, we could maintain the position of the spacecraft in the proximity of the asteroid such that with the gravitational effect of this large spacecraft to the asteroid, it would deviate slightly the trajectory of the asteroid, and it would miss the Earth.
This is one of the techniques.
There are others that are being looked at, for instance putting a propulsion system, an ion propulsion system on the surface of the intruder, and deviating its trajectory.
This is, again, a responsibility of the spacefaring nations, to find ways of, on one hand, detect early enough such threatening asteroids, and deviate their trajectory so that they miss the Earth.
