Let's talk about space debris today.
The accumulation of space debris over the decades, of space utilization or space exploration on different orbits, the geostationary orbit, the intermediate orbit and Low Earth Orbit has become a real problem because it will, if we don't take measures, it will make the access to space really difficult because of the likelihood of collisions.
Now, space debris is basically, an object in space that is no longer functional and useful.
Obviously, as long as a satellite is working well it's not a space debris, but as soon as it doesn't work anymore then it is a space debris, and if we have collisions between functioning and not functioning satellites, it can create a lot of extra debris.
If we look at this picture, which is an artist's view of the distribution of space debris, we see that we have a particular accumulation at the geostationary orbit, which is over the Equator,
36,000 km above the Earth's surface, or 42,000 km from the Earth's center.
Obviously, we have a lot of satellites there because most of the communication satellites are located on this orbit.
Obviously, there is a rule about the distribution of communication satellites along this track, their allocation to certain areas where satellites can be located; and now, there are new rules, in the sense that when a communication satellite is becoming no longer functional, it has to be moved to a so-called graveyard orbit normally above the geostationary orbit.
For Low Earth Orbit where we have a large accumulation of debris, roughly between 200 km altitude above the Earth surface and 2,000, which is the definition of the low Earth orbit, we have about 20,000 debris which are tracked, with the size of 10 cm or more.
These objects are tracked, which means that if there is a spacecraft, like the International Space Station and it's determined that in a few orbits or a few days we are going to have an uncomfortable situation where a space debris is coming very close to the International Space Station, which would cause a collision, then we can change somewhat the orbit of the International Space Station to make this distance a little bit larger.
So measures can be taken on active spacecraft like the International Space Station, but for satellites, which have normally altitude control, for some of them, but not necessarily a possibility to change the geometry of the orbit, then collision is something that can happen sometimes, and, in fact, it did happen a few times in the past.
This is an artist view of the distribution of space debris in the Low Earth Orbit.
Now, it seems very frightening, but you have to consider that the scale of the representation by the artist of the satellites, or the space debris themselves, and the Earth, is of course, not correct to the center.
All of the satellites or debris are represented at a larger scale than the Earth.
But anyways, this shows that there is a very large number of debris in the Low Earth Orbit, and measures had been taken for Low Earth Orbit limiting the lifetime of satellites because at an altitude of, say, 6-7-800 km, depending of course on the ballistic coefficient, which we talked about before, the lifetime of the orbit can be typically decades or even centuries.
And now, there is a rule, any new satellite put on Low Earth Orbit has to have a lifetime of 25 years maximum.
After that, it has to be either deorbited by a deorbiting pulse generated by a thruster, or another way is to increase the drag of the satellite, by some deployed mechanism that will cause its destructive deorbit, and then it falls on Earth, but it's now really destroyed in small particles as it can't stand through the atmosphere.
This is a spatial density of space debris in Low Earth Orbit versus altitude, according to a relatively recent NASA report.
It's quite interesting, because you see that, for the really Low Earth Orbit between 200 and 400 km of altitude above the Earth surface, the spatial density of the debris is not too dramatic.
The International Space Station is maintaining an altitude of about 400 km at this time.
And, once again, sometimes we have an uncomfortable nearing of space debris with the International Space Station; if it is a debris that is tracked, it can be foreseen and measures can be taken, but the situation is not too dramatic below, I would say, about 600 km above the Earth's surface.
600 km, by the way, is the altitude of the orbit of the Hubble Space Telescope which has been hit by some debris.
There is one high-gain antenna that has been hit by a meteorite and created a small hole of a size of about 2—2.5 cm, which has been visible during the visits to the Hubble Space Telescope in servicing missions until 2009, which is the last Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission.
You see a dramatic increase in the spatial density of debris at the so-called
Sun-synchronous orbit altitude which is roughly at 800—900 km.
And especially you have two peaks: one peak at about 780 km altitude corresponding to an Iridium cosmic breakup— there was a collision in 2009 between these two satellites an active Iridium, and a non-active debris-type
Cosmos satellite this created a lot of extra debris.
This is the reason why we have this peak at a little bit below 800 km altitude.
There is another peak at 850 km altitude corresponding to the Fengyun-1C Breakup.
There was a test of an anti-satellite killer, a satellite in 2007 by the Chinese, which, following the destruction of the satellite— so the test was successful— it created a cloud of debris at about 850 km altitude.
There is then a decrease in the density of debris beyond the so-called
Sun-synchronous altitude; typically 800 plus or minus 200 km altitude above the Earth surface.
Now we have a small table showing the annual probability of collision based on the projectile's size.
You have the International Space Station at an altitude of 400 km, the total surface about 500 square meters.
The likelihood of a collision with very small debris of a size between 0.1 mm and 1 mm is 1, which means that we have,
I would say, every day or even every week a collision with very small debris which, of course, for the International Space Station is not a problem.
For objects which have between 1 mm in size and 1 cm, you also have relatively frequent collisions, but again, less than 1 cm is for the International Space Station not a problem, at least if they don't create a hole in any of the modules, which are protected by a shield, MMOD,
Micrometeoroids and Orbital Debris shield, such that there is protection against all of the debris collision if the debris is less than 1 cm in size in metal.
You have the probability of debris for a collision with a debris of more than 10 cm in size,
2 x 10 to the minus 4, that's the annual value, so there is a very low likelihood that this could happen.
If you look at satellites on higher orbits, typically SPOT satellites at 800 km altitude, much smaller surface than the ISS, you see that the probability of a collision with large debris of more than 10 cm in size is about the same as for the ISS, and the reason is the higher density of such debris at this altitude.
So these are the values of the probability of collision for different objects at different altitudes and different sizes.
