Hello, today we will talk about global monitoring of water supplies and sanitation and how these monitoring efforts relate to household water treatment and safe storage.
Maybe you've been wondering, what is meant by global monitoring and why monitor access to basic services anyway.
To answer this let's take a look at two policy frameworks, which shaped the priorities and actions of the international development community, including the water and sanitation sectors.
Many of you will be familiar with the Millennium 
Development Goals, or MDGs and eight international development goals.
Annual MDGs, which were established following the 2000 Millennium Summit and adopted by all UN member states.
But perhaps fewer of you are aware that in the coming decades, what is called the post-2015 monitoring period, a new development agenda is about to be launched, called the Sustainable 
Development Goals, or SDGs.
First of all let's look at the MDGs
Under this framework there are 8 Goals with 21 associated targets ranging from ending extreme poverty and hunger to achieving universal primary education, to improving maternal health.
The aim of Target 7C under Goal 7 for environmental sustainability is to halve the proportion of the global population without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
The latest round of reporting by the WHO Joint Monitoring Program, or JMP, shows that on a global level the target for expanding access to improve water supplies has been met several years ahead of the 2015 deadline.
This is really an incredible accomplishment for the water sector.
Unfortunately the news for sanitation is not as positive.
We see that delivery of improved sanitation services has not kept pace with population growth, and thus we will miss the global target for sanitation in the year 2015 by nearly 700 million people.
It's important to know that for both water and sanitation targets of MDG data are reported at the national level, so there is not a specific objective to encourage equitable distribution of services within each country.
This is one critique of the MDGs, and we will revisit this later.
But first let's define a few terms that you will hear throughout this module.
First, a goal is an ambitious commitment to address a single challenge, typically global in scope.
Each goal can be broken down in two specific targets.
A target is defined as a specific measurable and time-bound outcome that directly contributes to the achievement of the stated goal.
And finally targets are monitored by periodically collecting data on various indicators, which are clearly defined, metrics using, used to measure progress towards targets, generally based on available data.
To use the earlier example, 
Goal 7 of the MDGs, which relates generally to environmental sustainability, includes Target 7C, which states that by 2015 we shall halve the share of people globally without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation, as compared to 1990 levels.
So you can see that the target is an action-oriented objective to be achieved over a specific time period.
But how can we monitor progress towards this target?
For water supply the JMP has defined an indicator of use of an improved drinking water source which is one that is protected from outside contamination, especially faecal contamination.
When a household reports using a protected water point, such as a household or yard tile, public standpipe, borehole or tube well, protected dug well, protected spring and rainwater harvesting system, that household is counted as progress toward the MDG target.
So far we've discussed the Millennium Development Goals and how progress on this development agenda is monitored using specific targets and indicators.
Let's examine now how global monitoring will look in a decade following the conclusion of the MDGs and a new policy framework called the Sustainable 
Development Goals, or SDGs.
The concept of SDGs was formally proposed on the 2012 UN conference on sustainable development with UN member states agreeing to goals which are action-oriented, concise, easy to communicate, limited in number, aspirational, global in nature and universally applicable to all countries, while taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development.
As of March 2015 there were 
17 proposed goals shown here and 169 targets and hundreds of proposed indicators to monitor compliance.
You can see here that there is a standalone goal for water and sanitation, Goal 6, which proposes to ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all.
This goal is underpinned by targets and indicators that center around three key concepts.
First, safely manage drinking water services, second, safely manage sanitation services and, third, hand washing at home.
Let's take a closer look at Target 6.1, the water related target.
This proposed target is to achieve by 2030 universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all.
The proposed indicators and definitions are shown here, organized around the drinking water service ladder.
You can see, the indicator for safely managed water is the percentage of the population using safely managed drinking water services and defined more specifically as the population using a basic drinking water source which is located on premises and available when needed free of faecal contamination, as well as priority chemicals and/or regulated by a competent authority.
In this case a basic drinking water source is similar to the MDG definition of an improved water source.
But now within a 30 minute round ship from household including queuing time.
This information is already routinely collected in household surveyes.
The information on faecal or chemical contamination can come directly from water quality testing and also from administrative offices which have data on regulation and management practices.
In addition to prioritizing the elimination of inequalities
SDGs will also try to improve an MDG framework by monitoring access to WASH in schools and health care facilities ending open defecation and achieving universal basic access.
The SDG dialog is evolving as we speak, and you can keep up with the conversation by checking out the reports and links listed here.
Take a minute to explore these resources and let us know what you think about the SDG agenda on the discussion forum.
So, in summary, this module examined global monitoring of water supply access to the use of goals, targets and indicators.
We also looked at how access to water is defined and monitored through the Millennium Development Goals and learned that MDG Target 7C to halve the share of the global population without access to improved water supplies, but fortunately achieved well ahead of schedule.
Next, we explored the upcoming sustainable development goals and a new set of targets which aim to improve upon MDGs through eliminating access inequalities, monitoring WASH access in schools and health care facilities and eliminating open defecation worldwide.
There are several challenges and opportunities that the new SDG framework presents.
One major challenge includes striking the right balance between granularity and simplicity such that the indicators are both true to the ground reality, but also universally relevant.
Opportunities include the chance to expand the monitoring capacity of the national institutions beyond household survey data collection and also the chance to harmonize efforts and institutions around a new set of development priorities.
And what about HWTS?
SDGs did not specifically prioritized use of household water treatment and safe storage, but since drinking water quality is now a specific indicator on the Target 6.1, there may be opportunities for water treatment and safe storage to play a role, especially at the community level.
In any case, we are about to enter a new and exciting period of global monitoring and we look forward to hearing more on the forum about how the SDGs might affect you.
