Welcome back.
So far we have talked about our conceptualization of smart cities, the different elements that need to be taken into account for thinking properly about Smart Cities.
Now, the concept of Smart Cities is not originally an academic concept.
It is a concept
that is mainly pushed by vendors and pushed by certain cities.
And so, what we are going to do in this session is to present the different vendors' perspectives, then we'll present the city's perspective and then we will briefly talk about what is at stake in between these two perspectives.
As we have said, and I think that's the academic contribution to it, this distinction between the infrastructure, the digital data layer and the services, leaving to the fact that you can manage the infrastructures more smartly if you want and that there are new, smart services possible on the basis of this digital layer.
So, this is, let's say, the academic sort of framing of Smart City.
From here, we can look at the different perspectives that are put forward by different companies promoting Smart Cities.
So there is first a perspective of the hardware vendors, these kind of companies that produce the various devices.
Generally, those are the data generating devices, the smart meters, the sensors, the cameras, all these things that basically contribute to creating that digital layer.
Then, there is the perspective of the infrastructure companies themselves.
Unlike the previous type of companies, these companies have traditionally been active in the urban arena, be they urban water companies, electricity companies, transport companies even postal services, telecom operators.
These companies also have embraced the concept of smart cities and put that concept forward because they can create on the basis of their infrastructures, a digital layer and services that go with it.
And then there is a third type of company or vendors.
They are new to the urban area.
Those are the IBMs, the Ciscos of the world.
They offer services to manage, to integrate this data, to manage this data, to analyze this data, and they also are maybe the most vocal ones in promoting the concept of "Smart City".
So, from here, we want to go to the city's perspective.
It's not exactly identical even though the city will rely
on all the technologies and the services that the different vendors provide.
So the city's perspective, or let's say,
the metropolitan area's perspective, is the one of managing these infrastructures, of creating the smart services that ultimately will serve their citizens, and their businesses.
Now, what is at stake when you look at these two things combined?
These two perspectives
 are not necessarily identical.
They're overlapping, but they're not necessarily identical.
And so, we identify sort of three things that are at stake.
The first thing is really the citizens versus the consumers.
Typically, the vendors, they look at consumers.
They want to monetize the services that they are providing, and, ultimately, they will look at the consumers of the smart services that they are proposing.
The second stake is the whole issue of demand pull versus technology push.
I mean, we have already said that Smart City is very much a techpush
It's built on digitalization and digitalization is a technological development.
And so, digitalization offers plenty of opportunities for cities, but there is a little bit of technology push especially by the vendors, to adopt these new technologies.
Whereas, on the city's perspective, this would rather be a demand view. 
Is this actually needed?
Does it help the city to make better, more efficiently managed new services that are actually demanded?
And so, ultimately, I think the main stake here
is the leadership of this transformation.
Is this transformation. the transition towards a Smart City sort of led by the vendors, the companies that can provide these kind of services?
Or is it led by the city or the metropolitan area itself or at least appropriated by the city or the metropolitan area?
In this first week, you have learned about cities as sociotechnical systems.
We have shown you how cities are best conceptualized as complex, dynamic sociotechnical systems.
Then, I talked about digitalization, what digitalization is, and the different elements that compose digitalization.
After that, we have looked at what digitalization does to cities and what Smart Cities actually are.
And just before, I have talked about different perspectives on Smart Cities - the vendors' perspective, the city's perspective, and our own academic perspective.
Now, in the coming week, we will talk about smart energy systems and apply these concepts to the energy part of urban systems.
But just before that, we will hear about Barcelona.
So stay tuned.
