Now you know about some of the specific pathogens that can cause diarrheal disease and that most of these pathogens originate in human or animal faeces.
Well there are so many different pathogens,
It is impractical to try and measure them all so what we do instead is we use indicator species to indicate the presence of faecal contamination.
Today, we will talk about those indicators species. It would be impractical and impossible actually to directly measure all the different pathogens that could cause diarrheal disease.
So instead, we look for indicator species that can show the presence of faecal contamination.
Some characteristics of an ideal faecal indicator are that it should be something that is universally present in the faeces of both human and animals in large numbers.
Those numbers should be higher than the actual numbers of the pathogens of interest.
And the indicators should not be harmful or pathogenic in itself. It should be something that's readily detected using simple inexpensive methods.
And it should also persist in the environment or water in a similar manner to faecal pathogens.
You wouldn't want it to actually grow in natural waters because then you would get misrepresentation and finally, if possible, the indicator should respond to treatment in a similar fashion to faecal pathogens.
One of the most common indicator species is a bacteria class called total coliforms.
Total coliforms are bacteria that can ferment lactose and produce acid in gas at thirty five degrees Celsius.
There are many different families of coliforms: citrobacter, klebsiella, hafnia and enterobacter and for this reason, total coliforms is not really useful as a faecal indicator because many of these bacteria have non faecal sources.
However, total coliforms can be useful for operational monitoring to demonstrate for example the effectiveness of treatment or overall cleanliness and integrity in the distribution system.
Thermotolerant coliforms, as the name implies, can tolerate heat and these are a subset of the total coliform class.
Thermotolerant coliforms are what used to be called faecal coliforms and they can ferment lactose within forty eight hours at
44 degrees Celsius.
Faeces contain a large number of thermotolerant coliforms but there are some indications of non-faecal sources of thermotolerant coliforms such as klebsiella and some species of enterobacter.
Also, there's evidence that thermotolerants under some conditions can grow or die off in water at ambient temperatures so it's not a bad indicator but it has some limitations.
Escherichia coli or E. coli is one specific species of thermotolerant coliforms that is generally agreed to be the most suitable indicator of faecal contamination.
There is some possibility that the E. coli may grow in the environment in tropical settings and it is only moderately persistent so the absence of E. coli doesn't necessarily mean the absence of faecal contamination.
However, on balance, considering all the different ideal characteristics of an indicator bacteria,
E. coli is considered to be the best available option.
Indicator bacteria are usually reported in terms of the number of counts or colonies in a one hundred millilitre sample.
Many drinking water standards and W.H.O guidelines are set to be no detectable E. coli or thermotolerant coliforms in a one hundred ml sample.
You can consider that water that has higher levels of indicator bacteria is probably more likely to have higher levels of faecal contamination though there is not a very clear correlation between indicator bacteria and pathogens on the other hand.
Still, water having very high levels of E.coli, more than one thousand counts per 100 ml, is probably very risky for consumption.
Water having no detectable E.coli in it, however, might not be completely safe because E. coli is relatively less persistent and robust in the environment compared to some pathogens.
For this reason, it would be preferable to combine a measure of water quality, such as
E. coli measure, with some kind of assessment of the system safety like a sanitary inspection which identifies a number of risk factors at a water source.
Then by combining a water quality measure, on the vertical axis, and water management measure, on the horizontal axis, we could make a risk matrix and prioritize areas, water sources for interventions.
Well, E. coli or thermotolerant coliforms are the most commonly used indicator species.
Other indicators might be more relevant for certain purposes.
Viruses travel in the environment very differently than bacteria so one might want to look at coliphage viruses that require a bacteria host to survive as an indicator for viruses.
Faecal streptococci are more hardy, robust bacteria compared to E. coli. so they could persist longer in the environment and maybe be a better indicator of long term faecal contamination.
Traditionally, methods for enumerating faecal streptococci have been more complicated but this is changing with the development of new methods.
Finally, protozoa can be very resistant to disinfection, to heat, to chlorine, to ozone, so E.coli is not a good indicator for treatment efficacy but some bacteria like clostridium perfringens or some bacillus spp. can form spores which are roughly similar in size and resistance to some protozoan pathogens.
Now, let's focus in on those pathways between faeces and faces that involve water.
We can think about a safe water chain with different stages where contamination could be introduced.
Contamination could occur at the water resource itself or during delivery to the consumer.
Faecal matter can also be introduced during the collection and transport of water if the source is outside the home.
When water is stored inside the household it could become contaminated and finally the drinking water vessel itself, a cup or a glass might be dirty and introduce faecal matter.
Now let's look at an illustration of these different stages in a safe water chain.
First, the water resource itself can be contaminated from contact with human or animal faeces.
Surface water often contains faecal bacteria but even ground water aquifers can be contaminated by inadequately managed sanitation.
Even if the water resource is clean or if water is purified at a treatment plant, it can become contaminated during delivery to the consumer for example in a piped water supply, if there is not continuous pressure in the distribution system contaminated water may enter the pipes through cracks or joints.
Another example though could be an improperly constructed rising main on a bore hole or suction hand pumps which are primed with unsafe water.
The point of collection itself can be contaminated, think of a communal tap or borehole spout which is handled and contacted by adults, children and even animals. And when the point of collection is outside the home, people must use containers which themselves may be dirty and people often rinse containers and wipe them with their hands before filling them up but if their hands are not clean this may not help at all.
The containers must then be transported back to the household giving another opportunity for contamination.
Open containers are especially vulnerable because it is easy to contact the water with hands during lifting and carrying and also dust or insects can enter an uncovered container.
Once the water is taken to the household it is often transferred to another container and may be stored on unhygienically, in open containers or on the floor where children and animals can introduce pathogens.
Point of use water treatment at this stage offers the possibility of inactivating pathogens introduced at earlier points in the water chain.
But even after storage, contamination possibilities exist.
Water may be retrieved from storage containers using an unclean dipper or ladle, especially if the storage container is uncovered.
Finally the drinking vessel itself, a cup or glass or perhaps a gourd can be full of faecal contamination.
Again, people may wipe the drinking vessel with their hands before using it but this might actually make the glass dirtier.
So there are many opportunities for contamination between the original source of drinking water and the actual point of consumption.
A big advantage of household water treatment is that it offers the possibility of removing any contamination that is introduced at the water resource, the delivery system or through collection and transport.
Many household water treatments don't prevent recontamination so it is important to have safe storage after a treatment step. And likewise, good hygiene, especially washing hands with soap, is important to minimize the possibility of clean drinking water becoming contaminated just before consumption by using a cup or glass that is faecally contaminated.
So in this module we have talked about different indicators of faecal contamination and how
E. coli is the preferred indicator bacteria and we have talked about different stages along the safe water chain from catchment to cup where drinking water can become contaminated.
