In this first week of the course, we've learned about some main challenges in urban sanitation, and provided an introduction to two distinct, but similar, planning frameworks.
Both approaches recognize the complex institutional realities of urban areas, bringing together the different stakeholders at different levels.
At the household domain, the importance of households, individual households, for the choice of sanitation technology.
At the neighborhood level, the importance of the different actors involved in providing affordable sanitation services.
At the municipal or citywide domain, the different actors providing citywide services.
And, finally, at the regional, or watershed domain, the actors involved in dealing with issues that impact environments beyond the city level.
In this week, we've talked about two urban sanitation planning frameworks:
Sanitation 21, introduced by Jonathan Parkinson, and the CLUES community-led urban environmental sanitation planning approach, developed by [Eawag] with UN-HABITAT and WSCC.
Sanitation 21 provides five planning stages.
First, defining the institutional commitment for service delivery.
Second, understanding the existing context and capacities.
The third stage assesses different strategies for the system improvement and the costs that these imply.
The fourth stage then formulates the management arrangements and cost recovery mechanisms.
Lastly, how to prepare for implementation, including institutional agreements and planned dissemination.
We've pointed out the importance of financial comparison of options in Sanitation 21, and the financial data that needs to be brought together in terms of capital investment, operation and routine maintenance, and capital maintenance to conduct a proper financial analysis and life cycle assessment for the selection of affordable solutions.
CLUES, at the local level, has seven planning steps, beginning with process ignition, and triggering of the community, and ending with step seven, implementation of improved services.
We've also pointed out the importance of stakeholder participation in the CLUES approach, bringing together the different stakeholders during the different steps of a planning process.
We've shown the importance of enabling environments.
The government support needed, the existing legal and regulatory frameworks, the institutional arrangements between different actors at different levels, the skills and capacities needed, the financial arrangements, including issues like microfinance tools and vehicles, and, finally, the socio-cultural acceptance of different solutions sought.
We will now ask you to wrap your heads around a first exercise on contextualizing urban sanitation.
We'll provide you with a typical image of a poor, [informal settlement] in West Africa and ask you to answer three questions.
Good luck.
