So, my name is Thomas Schildknecht.
I'm working with the Astronomical
Institute of the University of Bern.
I'm also the director of the Swiss Optical Ground Station and Geodynamics Observatory in Zimmerwald near Bern.
These two pictures, in fact,
I would say are realistic on one hand.
In terms of number of objects, they're absolutely realistic.
So, we are talking nowadays about roughly 20,000 objects larger than 10 centimeters orbiting the Earth, and this is only the population of objects we know.
On the other hand, they are not totally realistic because the size of the objects in these pictures is much, very much, exaggerated to the real size of the objects in space.
We are doing what we call space debris research which really means we are trying to find out more about the space debris environment.
So, we do different kind of studies to answer a series of questions.
The first most important questions being how many space debris are there?
What are their sizes?
What are their orbital regimes?
Do we see new sources?
Do we have sinks?
How is this environment going to evolve over the years?
One set of questions.
The other questions are then, what is the nature of these objects?
For some of the objects it's simple.
Space debris by definition are man-made objects in space which are not of any useful purpose anymore.
So, a spent upper stage is a space debris in most cases unless you intend to use that upper stage as a source of raw material, for example, but let's assume that this is a space debris.
This is an easy case, but there's a lot of small pieces, fragments up there where we don't know exactly what they are.
So, are these pieces of let's say solar cells, for example?
Multi-layer insulation materials?
These are the questions.
We try with these studies, we try to answer because it's very important to know what they are because if they are, for example, multi-layer insulation material, then you can go on and devise methods to mitigate the production of these debris in space.
But, it's important that you know what they are and what the sources are.
So, we did a lot of studies in terms of surveillance, so we have been looking at the sky in principle to find these pieces over many, many years and to find especially small size pieces which are not, let's say, among these 20,000s
I have been mentioning or not, were not known before we have been looking for them.
And then, we went off to characterize them.
We have been finding a very special class of debris pieces which are of what we call high area-to-mass which have a large area and a small mass, which are really very special like a lightweight, like a piece of paper, for example.
So, these are the kind of studies we have been doing.
We also maintain a catalog of objects in order to help space agencies, perhaps, to avoid a collision with an active spacecraft.
The outcome of these studies is that there is in all regions we have been looking at, there is a population of small-size debris which has not been known before.
So, the modelers which come up with models for the space debris environment, a number of pieces in certain regions, size range.
These models have been taking into account our results, especially in what we call the geostationary ring.
We have been finding, even in the late '90s, we got first evidence that there is small-size debris up there.
By small-size in this region,
I mean 10 centimeters, 20 centimeters,
And of course, the question comes up, what is the source of these debris?
Is it collisions?
Is it explosive events?
We had some explosive events in this particular region.
Or is it aging?
Aging of satellites.
You know satellites have some outer surface material like multi-layer insulation material or solar cells, and when they are aging, this material may become brittle or the glue may become brittle and it may just be off the surfaces.
So, in this particular region, we have been finding what I was alluding to, these high area-to-mass ratio debris.
And some of them are really high area-to-mass, which means many, many square meters per kilogram, so it's much more lightweight than a piece of ordinary office paper.
So, it's probably, we don't know yet for sure, but it could be material like these insulation blankets used to keep satellite warm.
Or it could also be that they are solar cells.
So, we are using, in particular, optical instruments, mostly what we call passive optical instruments.
So, it is a kind of classical telescopes used in astronomy.
We use them in the optical range, visible to near-infrared.
And the techniques we are using are very, very similar to what we used to do, and still do, when searching for asteroids, comets, or other moving natural objects in space.
So, this is, by the way, also the heritage, why we came to this research.
So, it's traditional optical telescopes.
The difference is especially in the fact that we take a lot, really a lot of images.
We take about one image every few seconds, so it means we get thousands of images every night from each of the telescopes we are using, and this is very specific.
The treatment of these thousands of images to find the needle in the haystack, the small-size objects in front of the myriads of background stars, this is really the secret.
So, it's about software, image processing softwares to find these pieces.
And afterwards, we need to try to come up with orbits for these objects or estimate orbits, or its celestial mechanics, or astrodynamics.
This is one type of sensors we are using, and the other one, which is a recent development.
We are also using active optical sensors, so laser ranging sensors where we emit the laser pulse and receive a few photons which are scattered or reflected by the object of interest.
And then, we measure the time of flight in principle, or the range as we call it.
This technique can be used to improve orbits of space debris, but also we can use the same technique to estimate attitude motion of the objects.
By the way, we are also estimating attitude motion by the optical techniques, the passive techniques by what we call, by using light curves.
So, this is the change of the intensity of the object with time which reflects somehow its motion, its attitude motion in space.
We are using spectroscopy to infer the surface material of the objects.
For example, to distinguish solar cells from perhaps something like bare aluminum.
So, we are using, in principle, we are using a whole serie of classical astronomical techniques, but with a special challenge that these objects are fast-moving in front of the background stars.
And that we are taking much more images than traditionally astronomers do.
There are, of course, other institutions worldwide working on the topic, and especially also doing some observations.
We have collaborations with many colleagues which have some, or do some studies for their own space agencies.
For example, we have close collaboration with Russian colleagues from the Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics in Moscow.
They are maintaining a catalog of space debris in high-altitude orbits, so in orbits like the geostationary orbit, or in medium Earth orbits like the orbits of the navigation satellites,
GPS, GLONASS,
BeiDou and so on.
We have collaboration with NASA colleagues, with JAXA colleagues from Japan.
So, this work is only meaningful if it's done in an international collaboration.
Let's give you an example.
If you have one object discovered here, over Switzerland, let's say.
So, this object is going to move, perhaps, around the world.
If it is in GEO, it may move out of your visibility zone for several weeks.
If you don't follow it up, then you will lose it, so you need some colleagues doing the same, or doing a follow-up observations on the other side of the Earth.
So, international collaboration is key in this domain.
It's a good question if the space debris problem is taken seriously by space agencies.
I would say space agencies were among the first who took the problem seriously.
I remember, it was the late '80s when the first space agencies, including NASA, ESA, JAXA and then the Russian Space Agency were becoming really aware of the problem.
And during the '90s, they established an Inter-agency Space Debris
Coordination Committee.
It's a technical body.
We call it also IADC which is working on solving technical questions, but also they have four working groups.
One is measurement, another one is modelling of the space debris environment.
The third one is shielding.
What can we do in terms of protecting our spacecraft?
And the fourth one is mitigation.
What can we do in terms of protecting the environment?
So, I think the topic is taken seriously by space agencies, but you also have to be aware:
Government space agencies are only one of the actors in space.
We have commercial space activities, especially Earth observation satellites which are owned by commercial companies.
We have commercial communications satellites on GEO, TV satellites and so on.
And we have a third player in this game which is governmental player again, but it's the military sector.
So, the problem has to be taken seriously, not just by space agencies, but by all sectors, all players, and actors in space.
So, on one hand, I would say yes, it's taken seriously, but on the other hand,
I would also say we need more effort right now to make sure that this situation is not getting out of control pretty soon.
So, there's a lot of scenarios for the evolution of the space debris environment.
And the problem is a bit similar to the scenarios when talking about global warming, for example.
So, these scenarios all include a set of parameters, assumptions which you could debate if they are correct or not, but all of these scenarios show that the space debris environment, in certain regions, for example, in the low Earth region at an altitude of between
700 and 1,000 kilometers, is going to increase dramatically over the decades to come if we do what we call business as usual.
So, the same launch rates and the same mitigation, let's say, measures we apply right now.
We apply some, but they are not strict enough to prevent even an exponential growth of that environment in terms of number of objects because we'll have collisions among objects which are not controlled.
And this means with each collision, we are producing a huge number of new fragments and all these new objects may have a certain possibility and increased possibility that there is collisions among uncontrolled objects.
In certain regions, we think all these models show that we have to expect, or are already in the phase where we have an exponential runaway of the number of objects.
So, that's the bad news.
There is also good news in the sense that we do, in these models, we can also modify the environment and for example, talk about removing some of the mass which is in space, some of the big objects, and try to see how many of these objects we have to remove in order to stabilize the environment, or in order to reach an acceptable collision risk for active spacecraft, or human spaceflight even.
So, there is certainly a lot which can be done, but one thing we have to be aware is that what we call remediation, so removing something, or doing something to the current environment.
This is much more costly and much more challenging also from the technical point of view than mitigation which means preventing the future or preventing the production of space debris.
There's a lot of simple measures to prevent the production of space debris.
The best measure actually is not to leave anything up there.
So, if at the end of the mission of, let's say, a spacecraft or an upper stage, if you remove that spacecraft or the upper stage from the orbit, that's the best way to prevent for the production of space debris.
Or you remove residual fuel at the end of a mission.
You empty your batteries.
Make sure that there is no source of energy which could produce an explosive breakup event of a spacecraft.
Just to name a few of the simple, of the measures which could prevent the future production of space debris.
Why did I decide to become a scientist?
So, this question is perhaps a more general one, I have to say.
I'm of the generation who witnessed the Apollo Program.
I was absolutely enthusiastic about space, about space in general and the space programs in the '60s.
And of course, I wanted to become an astronaut, as many of my generation.
I wanted to build space planes, rockets, and so on, but gradually, I was then also very much attracted by astronomy.
So, I wanted to know why the universe is as it is, or why we are seeing these stars up there.
What are these stars and so on?
And I went on and studied physics and astronomy.
I was then working primarily in, let's say, the near environment in the solar system.
I was engaged in a program to find exploding stars, what we call supernovae.
And afterwards, we also discovered a lot of minor planets, as they were called at that time, asteroids, near-Earth objects, and so that's where
I developed the techniques to find moving objects, to compute their orbits, and predict their orbits and future.
During the, let's say, '80s, beginning of the '90s, we also found a lot of these artificial objects in our images, and this brought me to the whole question of space debris, and this was another fascinating subject where I could apply the techniques which were classical on one hand, but on the other hand we had also to devise new methods.
And finally, I decided for myself that this problem is really becoming, or would become, very important for any kind of space missions, especially also manned missions.
And I would like to contribute to the solution of the problem.
I'm still convinced that there is a solution.
We just have to try and to work.
