Vectors are animals that are capable of carrying disease pathogens from a reservoir, an animal, a human or an environment to another host.
They are a major cause of sickness and death in many humanitarian contexts.
In addition to transmitting diseases, some vector may also be considered as a nuisance because of the painful bite or due to the large number. Sorry!
The objectives of this lecture is for you to understand the transmission mechanism of diseases through vectors, know the main vectors commonly encountered in emergencies and their related diseases, understand the outlines of vector control strategies.
A vector carries and transmits infectious pathogens from a reservoir to another host.
The reservoir can be an animal or human or the environment on which infectious agent depends to survive.
The pathogen can be transmitted mechanically to another host.
It means that the vector transmits the pathogens by transporting them on its body.
Let’s take an example: a fly landing on faeces with pathogens will then transmit this pathogen to the human by landing on its side or in the salad that the person is eating.
The pathogen can also be transmitted after a biological transformation.
In that case, the vector is involved in the life cycle of the pathogen which matures through the vector such as the malaria.
In the transmission of vector-borne diseases, infection can occur via biting, which for instance, the malaria transmitting mosquitoes or via skin penetration for instance, for the scabies transmitting mites or ingestion, food contamination by flies for instance.
In humanitarian context, displaced population are particularly at risk of vector transmitted diseases. Indeed the stress, the lack of good nutrition and lack of previous exposure to diseases are factors affecting the populations’ immunity to vector-borne diseases.
Overcrowding makes it easier for some vector to spread diseases from person to person.
This is particularly the case for instance for lice and mites.
Poor housing increases as well the risk to vector exposure and poor drainage, poor solid waste or poor sanitation management increase the risk of having vectors.
The area that host displaced population can also be an area that supports a significant vector population and protracted conflicts can also affect the capacity of authorities to carry out traditional vector control measures that used to be done in the past.
In order to minimize morbidity and mortality due to vector-borne diseases, vector control measures should be taken in epidemic zones, in epidemic-prone contexts or wherever there is a high presence of the vector.
Vector control strategies usually aim at reducing vector breeding sites, reducing vector population density or in order to reduce the risk of human vector contacts.
In other words, reducing the creation of the hazards, its transport and the exposure of people to the hazard.
The vector control strategies may be classified in four types: environmental control, in order to alter breeding sites such as draining or filling sites or also ensuring a proper waste management.
There is also the mechanical control, for instance using nets against mosquitoes, covering food against flies or using traps to catch rodents.
The biological management which consists of using living organisms or products against a different form of the vector.
A typical example is the use of fish that eat larvas for instance.
Finally, the chemical control for personal protection such as sprays used as a mosquito repellent or insecticides for environmental control.
However, it is usually recommended to use insecticides as the last resort.
Indeed it is much more efficient and effective and less costly to collect and remove refuse regularly than to depend upon insecticides to combat flies or rat poison to limit rodents.
In addition, while using the pesticides it is very important to ensure that the staff, the communities and the local environment are adequately protected and of course avoid creating chemical resistance to the substance used.
In summary in order to take effective actions against a vector it is crucial to be familiar with the vector life and its habitat.
The following table lists some common vectors of diseases encountered in humanitarian contexts.
Mosquitoes with three main species responsible for transmitting diseases.
The anopheles which breed in rather unpolluted water such as pot holes or wells and which transmit malaria.
The aedes which tend to breed in water receptacles such as bottles or buckets and which transmit yellow fever and dengue.
The culex which breed in second water loaded with organic matter such as in latrines and transmit filariasis.
Flies proliferate in old places where human beings are living. They feed on decomposing organic matter, excreta and fruits.
They play an important role in the transmission of diarrheal diseases.
Actions against house flies include limit or eliminate breeding sites, typically collect refuse, improve compost heaps, protect latrines, improve drainage.
In addition, sources of attraction should be reduced and food well protected with lids.
Lice are found on hair and clothing, they can transmit typhus which is fatal to ten to forty per cent of untreated patients as well as relating fever.
Actions against lice include improving general hygiene, wash clothing and blankets and treating all people with an insecticide boulder.
Fleas feed on the blood of mammals and birds.
They are found in beds, in the ground and in clothing.
The rat flea is responsible for bubonic plague and murine typhus.
Bed bugs do not transmit any diseases but they nevertheless constitute a considerable nuisance because they feed on blood.
They hide in cracks, in walls or wood and also in bedding.
Insecticide is required to eliminate them.
As we have seen vector control diseases are a major cause of sickness and death in many humanitarian crises where population are particularly at risk.
In order to reduce the transmission of these specific diseases, it is very important to know the life cycle of vectors and its habitat in order to take effective measures at the right time and at the right place.
For instance, if body lice, the vector of typhus, have to be eliminated, they have to be attacked on the body or on the clothing.
It is pointless to spray surfaces with the residual insecticide.
But on the other hand to control bed bugs and other crawly insects such as cockroaches and flies, spraying walls or the furniture and the floor is an effective measure because these insects rest on such surfaces after feeding.
However, remember that the use of chemicals to control vectors is not necessarily the best options.
Mechanical, environmental or biology measures may be much more appropriate and efficient.
So in order to design a proper vector control measure, a detailed study on the vector and often expert advice are needed and should be sought from national and international health organizations.
Let's have a look now at a concrete example.
In the next video we will see the control campaign carried out by the ICRC in Madagascar prisons in collaboration with local authorities and the pastor institutes.
