Today, we're going to talk about governance, new forms of governance, due to the rapid development of poverty which is a statement to observation planning failure as, despite every attempt we've had at planning, we find ourselves in a situation where poverty continues to increase and therefore, inequalities also continue to increase.
As a result of this failure, we asked ourselves what type of governance should be implemented in order for infrastructures, for amenities, for everything that we plan for specifically, physically, down to the ground, can be effective one day or another.
We'd like to remind that planning is only useful if it is effective, efficient, if it serves the majority.
If you plan a road which will never be built, it is useless to plan it.
So, we began to imagine new government systems, new decision-making processes, which we regroup under the governance umbrella.
Today, this governance, this government, is no longer centralized but requires a multi-party approach.
We no longer just have the State level of government, we now have a larger number of parties which can be at once public and private, and together, these parties, will more or less, make decisions about the future and the development of cities.
This is why we are no longer talking about a government but a governance system instead.
We are, therefore, going towards good governance as there would be a basic scheme.
I say, "there would be", we have not yet fully tested everything in order to say, "this is how it works", but we have a good governance, an idea of the parties' involvement needed in order to ensure that decision-making on urban territory is carried out properly.
To ensure this, multiple parties and, mainly, less visible borders are needed between both public and private parties.
Which is public, which is private?
Until today there was a clear delimitation between the two.
Which is formal and which informal?
Things are less obvious here as well, less clear-cut than they used to be and the State versus the civil society, a centralized approach versus a decentralized approach.
So, today's governance involves our questioning regarding borders between these different elements, public/private, formal/informal, the State/civil society.
The paradox of globalization we already mentioned it.
What is it?
It is that on the one hand we'll try to have a good governance, a decentralization of powers and on the other hand, we realize that in cities, in today's winning global cities, there is a re-centralization of power.
Therefore we are in a paradoxical pendulum where, on the one hand we adopt a decentralization approach and on the other hand on the contrary, on the world stage, when one studies global cities, there should be a tightening of powers around a small number.
The other paradox is, if you go down governmental levels, decentralization, from the State to the municipality, we find ourselves in basic administrative units which are municipalities which most of the time, don't correspond to anything.
Why don't they correspond to anything?
Because in the case of agglomerations we find ourselves in several municipalities and it is exceedingly rare to come across a complete overlap between functional space and political space.
The government rules over a space and it's not necessarily the logical one for the functions found in that city.
In this case there is no overlap.
There is also the development of large entities such as the European Union.
Therefore, on the one hand we will decentralize municipalities and on the other hand we have much more important developments where large entities are being created.
It is a true paradox, as we have opposing political movements.
And so decision-making somehow becomes extremely blurry.
We don't know if we should continue decentralizing or, on the contrary, re-centralize and fight on the world stage.
We have already said, regarding environmental issues, the municipality, the local community is probably not conducive to making major decisions.
Consequently, there are a certain number of decisions which must be made between the State or between larger entities, larger than the state, no doubt, and others can be decentralized at the municipal level.
Today, this new style of governance implies, first of all, a decentralization, which we have already begun to talk about.
Decentralization, in other words the State will transfer some of its power to local communities.
Having multiple parties, is the second element to these new forms of governance, we've already talked about it.
Decentralization, multiple parties which include private ones but also what's globally referred to as civil society.
Once we take into account these new parties and decentralization, there are types of partnerships which can be created.
Two of the main parties, as well as the State of course, are, on the one hand, community organizations, and on the other hand, the private, through public/private partnerships.
We have already mentioned these partnerships so, in the next video we'll talk mostly about community organizations.
Who are they and what can they do regarding urban decision-making?
Are they parties that we can apply?
You know the answer, it's yes, it is a new party, which we are increasingly considering but we will see that there are also a number of limitations to this new multi-party approach.
Involving these new parties, however, shouldn't be a way for the State to dissociate from a number of rights they had.
