We now turn to the second module of this chapter dedicated to physical properties of the fluids.
During this first module, we have seen the states of matter, this applies mainly to simple bodies. We will see that in many cases, the matter is found in forms somewhat more complex. 
We often speak of divided matter, we will also see an essential property of fluids which is the notion of viscosity.
This will allow me to address more broadly the notion of rheological property of a fluid.
So far I have spoken of simple bodies, so bodies such as gas, that we will find quite commonly, oxygen, nitrogen ...
There are a lot of materials that are simple bodies but there are also fluids that are much more complicated.
We often speak of divided matter.
There are a lot of fluids that are precisely mixtures of particles in a fluid.
Depending on the type of particle and the type of fluid, we will have different categories.
The general concept of dispersion is reserved when there are fine colloidal particles, for example, clays, which are in a liquid, for example water.
The notion of suspension will correspond to particles that are bigger, so their sizes, generally greater than a few tens of microns, also in a liquid.
This is for example a granular medium which would be saturated.
We talk about emulsion when we have drops or droplets in a liquid.
A common example is the vinaigrette, a mixture of oil and vinegar. So we will see in the next chapter, with emulsions, that we have here several interfaces that are controlled by surface tension. Last case of mixture, is the notion of foam, for example, when we pore our morning coffee in a coffee machine. There is a lightweight foam that appears.
Here we have air bubbles in a liquid, shaving foam is a common example of foam.
We have seen that the kinetic theory was a description at the molecular scale of what was happening in a gas, it will not be the tool that will be used in this course, firstly because the mathematical tool behind, in detail, is relatively complicated and we would be interested at a number of details that is far too important for the practical applications.
So let's just have a macroscopic description of fluids, we will consider that the fluids at a macroscopic scale, that is to say at our observation scale, behave as continuous media. 
What is a continuous medium?
It's a mathematical idealization.
To have a relatively intuitive idea this is what happens when, for example, you visit a museum with here for instance, a painting of Serra of the impressionist school called pointillist.
If you are relatively close to the painting, all you see are spots of color. But if you move away from the painting, from a certain distance, what you will see appear is a relatively thin image.
By losing information, we will have a clear picture of what is going on.
The fluids are a bit like the painting of Serra, at the molecular level they are points, if we idealize it as material points or small particles that occupy an infinitesimal volume, and at a macroscopic scale, so at a much larger scale than the molecular level, we will be able to treat it as a continuous medium.
The big advantage of continuous media which, represented here, for example in the flow,
I have here a wall and a fluid flow along this wall there.
We will be able to introduce concepts such as streamlines, velocity field that we will see a little further in the chapter dedicated to kinematics. If we had to look at the detail at the molecular scale, it would be necessary to describe the arrangement of the particles over time, the collisions, and so on.
We would have here information that would be far too rich to be treated for practical applications. That is why we will mainly be interested in the mechanics of continuous media in order to address the problems of fluid mechanics.
I have so far discussed essentially of the physical properties of liquids, gases, and fluids.
And we have given an example through the kinetic theory where we have explained the notion of pressure and the notion of temperature. There is another way to also describe the mechanical behavior of the fluids, it is a description called rheological. 
The term of rheology designating the science of matter flowing. This matter may be either solid, it will be an extremely slow flow or a deformation extremely slow at the scale of observation.
It may well also be a conventional fluid which will flow in much faster way.
A typical example, is for instance a glacier, if I look at what is happening in an observation scale of a few minutes, we have here a solid.
And if I look at what is happening on a much larger time scale, almost geological, we would see a liquid flowing.
Rheology is the science that will help understand how the material, that is either solid, liquid or gaseous, how this material flows when stressing it.
Rheology is the science of flows, in Greek "rheos" means mean flow and we notice "logos", the science.
The sentence of Heraclitus was "panta rei", 
"everything flows"
For a rheologist, all material flows, one simply has to wait long enough.
There are a lot of concrete examples, we have seen the glaciers, here we have the example of the rock glacier of Lona in the Valais.
This rock glacier, seen here, enters gradually in the lake called Lake Lona.
At the scale of observation which would be here the minute, if you walk on the rock glacier, you will have the impression of walking on a pile of stones.
However, if we look at what happens over several years we would gradually see this mass which is a mixture of ice and pebbles, entering the lake like a highly viscous fluid.
We see through this example that the same material can have a fluid behavior or a solid behavior depending on the scale of observation. What can be done to have a more quantitative criterion, is to introduce the number of
Deborah.
Deborah was not a scientist, it is a character taken from the Bible.
I will not go here into details. This number of 
Deborah is the relationship between a relaxation
time, which is the time it takes for a material to answer when stressed from a mechanical point of view. t index e is the time of observation, the experimental time, if we do a laboratory experiment, we do this for an observation time of a few seconds or a few minutes sometimes several hours.
When working on a geological scale, it could be in the hundreds of years or millions of years, so we have time scales extremely variable.
This number of Deborah will be able to take values extremely different.
If I come back to the glacier for example, when we will stress mechanically the ice, we will have a certain relaxation time that is characteristic of the elasto-plastic behavior of ice.
This parameter here does not change, it is an intrinsic characteristic of the material.
However, what will change is the time of observation, it can be short, for example, when I walk and
I look at the glaciers, it is an observation of a few seconds, a few minutes.
If I'm more of a glaciologist and I l ook at it throughout the century, it will be several years, decades or hundreds of years.
Depending on the value we will have here, we will have either a small
Deborah number, in this case, it means that the relaxation time is short compared to the experimental time, the observation time. 
At that point, we will see that the material flows like a fluid.
In contrast, if we have a relaxation time extremely large compared to the time of experience, that means that you will be watching, but the material is going to take so much time to react when you stress it that it will behave like a solid. We can illustrate this also, the glacier is an interesting example, but that may seem distant. We can observe that with materials much more common that may have a behavior either solid or liquid depending on the experimental period with times t_e which are much shorter.
An extremely common example is the one of cornstarch.
What this film shows, is an experience made a few years ago at the EPFL with cornstarch, a mixture of starch and water, here, a relatively large volume. We will have in this case a behavior either elastic or a fluid behavior, extremely pasty, depending on the type of stress.
Let's look at this film.
We see that if I move slowly, it is an extremely pasty fluid, it's hard to get out.
If the person moves his foot, we have something which is liquid.
It is more or less sticky, a bit like quicksand.
In contrast, if the stress rate is extremely fast, we have a behavior which is similar to that of an elastic membrane.
We see that we can support very easily the weight of two persons.
What is happening?
It is simply, depending on the duration of the experimentation, which will be here a few seconds, we have an elastic behavior.
If instead, which was the case at the beginning, the person remains still, the time of experience will be much larger.
We will have in this case a fluid-like behavior.
Another example is the Silly Putty which is an elastomer, this material, if I stress it relatively quick, it behaves a bit like modeling clay:
I can stretch it.
If now
I exercise a brutal situation, it can break, so we have a brittle solid material.
We can also see that this material, if we stress it extremely briefly, can also behave like an elastic material, so if I make a ball,
I can easily have something that bounces elastically.
Now if I leave this material at rest, this is an experience in quick motion,  it would otherwise take several minutes to observe this phenomenon.
We see that we have something that spreads like a highly viscous fluid.
We see here that we have a behavior that is both the behavior of a ductile solid material, of an elastic solid material or a material that we shall say is a viscous fluid, according to the observation period.
We will now introduce the concept of viscosity, to do so, we will use an experiment that is the first historical experiment due to the famous Isaac Newton who, in 1687, highlighted the notion of viscosity. At that time, he realized it with a highly concentrated mixture called molasses that he sheared between two plates.
We will not reproduce the experiement but if we numerically represented what happens we would see that if I place the fluid here between two solid walls and that I put into motion the upper wall, I will observe shear.
Shear in fluid mechanics describes both the motion, it can also sometimes designate the velocity. We shall talk about shear velocity, a velocity which will be a relative velocity.
And also the stress field, we will refer to as shear stress.
We see that if I change the speed of the plates,
I will have a velocity field that will be linear, if I apply now a pressure gradient, we will see that as an application at the end of the course, the velocity profile takes a non-linear form that will be something rather close to a parabola.
We will now explain a little more this notion of viscosity by interpreting this linear velocity profile.
If I recall Newton's experience, I have a space between two plates
I put into motion the upper plate at a velocity u and what
Newton observed is that in order to put into motion this plate here we will have to apply a force that counteracts the forces of friction due to the viscosity of the fluid.
He observed two things, the first one is the notion of fluid resistance, we will introduce the notion of shear stress to represent this friction.
The second point observed by Newton is that this frictional force, if I bring it per unit area, that will make a shear stress, this shear stress will be proportional and will be linear to the velocity of displacement of the plate, will be inversely proportional to the air gap, i.e. the distance between the two plates.
We have here a linear relationship with the velocity, inversely linear with the height, and has a coefficient of proportionality which is an intrinsic constant of the material, we will call it the dynamic viscosity. We will see that there is a second viscosity that is called the kinematic viscosity.
So the ratio u / h, it is also the velocity gradient, we are talking here about shear rate or relative velocity of shear. 
In this course the variable will be γ dot.
What is relatively important to remember is that we will be able to link linearly the shear stress to the shear rate i.e. the speed of deformation, and that this linear relationship is linked via a coefficient of proportionality, that we call the dynamic viscosity.
This law is called the law of Newtonian fluids it defines a class of mechanical behavior that we name
Newtonian fluids or linear fluids.
Let’s give some classical values of dynamic viscosity, the unit will be the Pascal-second, one may find in the literature many other units, I am not even talking about Anglo-Saxon literature.
For example, we see the notion of Poiseuille, one Poiseuille is one Pascal-second or poise, or centipoise.
We often introduce the kinematic viscosity which is nothing else but the ratio between the dynamic viscosity and the density of the material.
For instance, we have relatively interesting things, if
I take the example of water and air which have a dynamic viscosity which is extremely different, it is about the order of 10 ^ -3 for water, it is of the order of
10 ^ -5 for air.
The density ratio is such that when I divide the dynamic viscosity by the density
I get a kinematic viscosity for water which will be lower or about the same order of magnitude than the one of air.
We thus see something that is relatively interesting, which is if we think in terms of dynamic viscosity, we have two materials with two fluidities extremely different, we almost have a ratio of 50 or 100 between the two whereas for kinematic viscosity, we here have a ratio of 5.
If I take other common materials that have a Newtonian behavior, or behavior that may reasonably be assumed to be
Newtonian.
So we have the following values of dynamic viscosity expressed in
Pascal-seconds, so for air we have
2.10 ^ -5, for water we have seen the order of magnitude is the milli-Pascal second, for olive oil, we have a fluid that will be much less liquid, much more viscous at room temperature, it will be of the order of 0.1 
Pascal second, honey will strongly depend on the sugar content and of the temperature.
We have viscosities which are roughly between 1 and 10 
Pascal second.
If we take much more viscous materials, caramel or maple syrup, we can easily reach 100 
Pascal seconds. Bitumen which is not actually a Newtonian fluid, but which may, by first approximation be considered as Newtonian, reaches colossal viscosities since it will be of
Pascal-second.
An experience that can be done relatively simply in the kitchen is to take 3 glasses of the same volume and pour water, olive oil or honey and we see extremely easily that the time required to empty the same volume will be very different whether the material is not very viscous such as water, or very viscous such as honey.
At the end of this module we have seen a class of fluids, the Newtonian fluids, which are characterized by a linear relationship between the shear stress and the velocity or rate of shear and we have highlighted this coefficient of proportionality called viscosity.
Most fluids that surround us are
Newtonian fluids, i.e. with a linear behavior but there exists also many fluids that are called non-Newtonian and do not verify this linearity law and we will give in the following module a few examples.
