During previous modules, we have introduced the notion of pressure, we have seen the notion of agitation velocity and have introduced a remarkable property of fluids namely the viscosity.
We have seen the existence of a class of fluids for which there was a linear relation between the shear stress and the shear velocity and that there was a coefficient of proportionality that we called viscosity. Fluids for which we have this linearity between the velocity of deformation and the shear stress are called Newtonian fluids.
Many of the fluids that surround us are Newtonian fluids but not all fluids are
Newtonian fluids, we will now see a few examples.
The rest of the course will be only dedicated to Newtonian fluids.
Another interesting notion to know, is the notion of rheogram.
A rheogram is the law that links the shear stress to the gradient or more precisely to the shear rate.
The ratio between shear stress and shear rate will be the viscosity.
If we have a linear fluid, we have seen previously that we have the stress that is equal to the shear rate multiplied by the viscosity.
The ratio between stress and shear rate, this stress is the viscosity and it is constant for a Newtonian fluid so we have regardless of the shear rate, a value of viscosity that remains constant.
We have materials that have a viscosity that will change according the velocity at which we stress them. If for example we take cornstarch which we have seen previously, we will have what we call a fluid that is a shear thickening fluid.
The more we stress it quickly, we will have shear rates relatively important and the more its viscosity will increase, we see that we can have viscosity variations that will be of
1, 2 or 3 orders of magnitude when we will increase the shear rate.
Conversely, we will have fluids that we call shear thinning fluid, these are fluids where we will observe a collapse so a decrease extremely important of many orders of magnitude of the viscosity as we will increase the shear rate of the fluid.
It is for example, for people who do tinkering, what happens with the paints that we find in stores, when we open the bucket we have a material which is in the form of a material extremely pasty and when we will apply the paint on a wall with a paint roller, we will increase the strain rate and we have a material that will spread relatively easier. The material will liquefy itself, well it doesn't liquefy, it was already a liquid but it will be shear thinning, its viscosity will decrease during the stress. What we can keep in mind is that a Newtonian fluid, is a material that behaves linearly so the propotionality coefficient remains constant: we have a dynamic viscosity μ which is constant.
However, all fluids that do not respect this law of linearity are fluids that we will call by definition "non-newtonian".
They will have a viscosity that isn't constant when we stress them, it will not be constant over time or will not be constant according to the strain rate.
There are many experiments extremely interesting to show the properties of non-Newtonian fluids, one of them is for example to suck liquid with a syringe, we have the real-time experiment, I will enlarge afterwards what is happening.
What we will notice is that,
I pause the picture, we have here the formation of a jet and that if it were a Newtonian fluid, and that there were no surface tension, the moment the syringe is above the free surface, it would cease this jet.
On the other hand, here, we observe that if I keep sucking with my syringe,
I keep on observing this jet.
We have a characteristic extremely interesting of non-Newtonian fluids.
To understand what is happening
I will use here a culinary analogy that is a bit far-fetched but for understanding a little better what is going on.
Simple bodies are composed essentially of atoms or of molecules so objects that at the microscopic scale are more or less spherical.
We have a lot of materials, such as polymers which are materials that will take shapes extremely elongated, we will speak for example of polymer chains.
This is the representation here with a spaghetti of molecular chains that will have a certain length or else that will wrap in the form of a ball.
The fact of having objects that will occupy in space and that will have in space properties relatively different of a stack or of an arrangement of spheres, will contribute to the
Newtonian properties of the material.
Here for example I will replace my syringe by a vacuum cleaner and if I try to suck a spaghetti, the spaghetti stick together or are entangled, so I will be taking not one but several, I will be able to carry in that way my spaghettic liquid.
Of course this is an extremely dared image but can still give a good representation of what is going on at the molecular scale.
Another experiment extremely common to characterize or highlight the non-Newtonian nature of materials, it is the Weissenberg effect.
In a beaker, we introduce the liquid, we then introduce a cylinder that we will rotate.
If we have a material that is a Newtonian material for example, when we will rotate this inner cylinder we will have acceleration forces and centrifugal forces that are going to dig the free surface of the material, we will see appear a movement, a widening at the cylinder due these centrifugal forces.
However, for non-Newtonian fluids, since we have still this problem of length of the polymer chain,  we can have a behavior that is completely different which is illustrated here through this little movie.
On the left, we have a Newtonian fluid, it is glycerol.
On the right, we have a non-Newtonian fluid, viscoplatic which is Carbopol.
We see on the left that there is a widening quite visible due to the centrifugal forces, on the right it is a little less obvious but we see that we don't have this widening and that we have on the contrary a slight camber therefore a part of the material which tends to climb in direction of the cylinder.
Again, if I am trying to get an explanation at the molecular scale of this behavior, of this 
Weissenberg effect, I can always use my culinary analogy a little far-fetched by replacing the polymer chains by spaghettis.
If now, I do not rotate my material, for example with a fork we see that we have a small rise of the material which is going to wrap around the object, which is represented here by a fork.
Another experiment to highlight the difference of behavior between a Newtonian liquid and a non-Newtonian liquid, it is an experiment relatively simple to do, using a syringe.
We will observe the shape of the jet at the outlet of the syringe.
On the right
I have a non-Newtonian fluid, it is polymeric liquid.
On the left I have a Newtonian fluid, it is still the glycerol liquid.
In the syringe, in both cases I have a fluid
I will push the tip of the syringe to form a jet and I will look the shape of the jet.
We will see that on the right we have a jet that tends to increase its diameter, we have a swelling which is quite characteristic of a polymeric liquid whereas for a Newtonian fluid we have a light contraction and we have a jet that takes a shape relatively straight characteristic of liquid or a
Newtonian behavior.
If we want to give an explanation of this behavior we must recall that polymeric liquids consist of chains. They are objects that are in the form of chains that can be more or less formed into balls.
When we will, in the syringe, push the material in the syringe.
We will force the molecules that occupy a certain volume, we will force them to stretch out.
They will have a shape rather of vermicelli, of elongated spaghettis.
However, once we will leave the syringe, we don't have lateral walls, the particles will be able to take their preferential shape, in general more or less as balls.
At this point they will occupy the whole space that is given to them, we will have a swelling of the jet.
We approach the end of this course and I will give the answer to the introductory quiz of the course.
Afterwards, there will also be the validation test of this chapter to be done.
The first question of the quiz was to know what we called a viscous fluid.
Two possibilities:
Either a viscous fluid is a fluid that sticks to utensils, this is the case with your spoon in the morning when you dip it in honey.
Or with the notion of viscosity, we mean the ease with which we can spread, or pour a liquid.
The right answer is the second answer.
The notion of viscosity represents the ease with which we can make a liquid flow or a gas and so is not at all linked to the notion of adhesion of a liquid to walls.
The second question was the notion of temperature, and so what the temperature represents at the molecular scale.
Two possibilities: it represents the heat conduction or else it is a representation of the thermal agitation of molecules.
It is this last answer that is the right one, the temperature is a macroscopic quantity that represents at the microscopic scale (the molecular scale) the thermal agitation of molecules, i.e. the unceasing fluctuations of velocity of the molecules due to the unceasing collisions that these molecules have between them or against a wall.
We have arrived at the end of this first chapter dedicated to the physical properties of fluids, we have seen the notions of gases, of liquids, of solids, of divided matter, we have introduced the notion pressure and the notion of temperature. We also have introduced the concept of Newtonian fluids which are fluids for which there is a linear relation between the shear stress, the velocity gradient, and the coefficient of proportionality called the dynamic viscosity.
This viscosity, at constant temperature, stays constant.
These linear fluids are called
Newtonian fluids, most of the fluids that will interest us in this course will be Newtonian fluids.
There are also fluids that do not verify this law of linearity between the stress and the strain rate, that are called non-Newtonian fluids.
In the next chapter we will tackle another property extremely important which is the property of surface tension.
