Welcome!
Welcome to the Plasma Physics
Course of EPFL.
My name is Paolo Ricci, I am here at the EPFL, professor in Theoretical Plasma Physics and today I would like to tell you what a plasma is and where plasmas can be found, in nature and the laboratory.
I will briefly tell you what the word <i>plasma</i> means and I will go with you through a brief history of plasma physics.
So, what is a plasma?
Well, we all know that if you increase the temperature of a solid then you can destroy the crystalline lattice structure and you can end up with a liquid
If you furthermore increase the temperature of the liquid, then the kinetic energy of the atoms increases and the distance between atoms also increases and what you end up with is a gas.
Solid, liquid, gas; the three states of matter that we all know.
But what happens when you increase furthermore the temperature, let's say beyond 10,000 Kelvin, just to give a number?
Well, then the kinetic energy of the atoms of the gas becomes so high that when they collide, the electrons can be stripped away.
Matter becomes a collection of ions and electrons.
This is what we call <i>plasma</i>, the fourth state of matter.
Plasma is therefore ionized gas, that can be reached if the temperature of the gas is sufficiently high that the electrons can be stripped away from the atoms.
We deal most of the time in our everyday life with gases, liquids, solids.
So, where are plasmas?
Where can plasmas be found?
Well, actually there are a number of examples of plasmas in nature and in the laboratory.
To start with, stars.
Stars are made of plasmas.
As a matter of fact, most of the visible matter in the Universe is in the plasma state.
But there are also examples of plasmas in nature on our planet.
Here is a lightning: this is a plasma, and there are other examples that can be found on our planet.
For example, the aurora borealis is a beautiful evidence of plasmas that can be found on our planet.
And there are also man-made plasmas, neon lamps are an example of plasmas.
And this is not it, because in a number of laboratories worldwide, matter is heated at very high temperature in order to reproduce the nuclear fusion reaction that occurs in a star.
Here is, for example, one of these devices that is used to heat up matter at such a high temperature, the TCV tokamak in Lausanne.
The idea of using on our planet the fusion reaction that occurs in a star to produce energy that is clean, sustainable, without emission of greenhouse gases, nor of long-lived radioactive waste.
We have mentioned stars, we have mentioned neon lamps.
Clearly these are very different systems, characterized by very different temperatures, densities.
Well, in reality the plasma state spans a huge range of temperature and density.
If we look at what is the state of matter as a function of density and temperature, density which we measure in particles per meter cubed, and temperature, which we measure in Kelvin, we observe that the solid, liquid and gaseous state occupy a very small portion of this huge parameter space.
All the rest is occupied by plasmas.
At very high density and high temperature one can find that the plasma state is present in the solar core.
At slightly smaller density but a higher temperature one can find that plasmas that are found in machines that are used for obtaining the nuclear fusion reaction on our planet.
And solar corona is at slightly smaller density and temperature.
Neon lamps are at similar density but lower temperature.
And the temperature comparable to the solar corona but at lower density, one has the plasmas that are found in nebulas or in the solar wind.
And at even lower temperature, one can have plasmas that are found in the interstellar space.
And the word <i>plasma</i>, where does it come from?
What does it mean?
It's actually a Greek word that means 'a moldable substance,'
'jelly'.
It was given by Irving Langmuir, a Nobel Prize winner, one of the pioneers in the study of Plasma Physics.
He was studying mercury arc discharges and found that this substance, the plasma, was diffusing in the vacuum chamber as a jelly in a mold.
So, when did scientists start to work on plasma physics?
The earliest studies date to the 1920s, 1930s.
A few of these scientists, among which Irving Langmuir, who I was citing, started to work on ionospheric plasmas because these were affecting radio transmission, and at the same time, on the gaseous electron tubes, these were devices that were used, for example, to rectify current in the era before semiconductors.
In the 1940s, Hannes Alfvén, another Nobel Prize winner working on Plasma Physics, discovered the magnetohydrodynamic plasma waves, now called Alfvén waves, these are the fundamental waves in plasmas and Alfvén proposed that they had an impact on the dynamics of astrophysical plasmas.
But the largest development of plasma physics came in the 50s where a few countries, the United States, the United Kingdom,
Soviet Union, started to work on magnetic fusion research.
Basically, on reproducing the reaction that occurs in the stars to produce energy.
This was initially an offshoot of the nuclear weapons program.
However the progress in this research was much slower than initially thought.
And research, which up to that moment had been classified and carried out independently by these three countries, was unclassified during the Second UN Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy that took place in Geneva in 1958.
In general, the development of devices which could reproduce on our planet the fusion reaction that occurs in the stars has been the strongest drive to the study of plasma physics.
The mainstream avenue, research avenue that has been followed, is one of the construction of the tokamak device.
Starting from the earliest device, a number of tokamak have been built in the world.
For example,
I'm showing here the TFTR tokamak that was built in the United States, or the largest existing tokamak in the world, the JET tokamak, which is in the United Kingdom.
Along with the mainstream tokamak approach, a number of other approaches have been followed in order to make energy from fusion a reality.
And just to mention two of those, the Stellarator, here is the W7-X Stellarator in Germany, or the National Ignition Facility in the United States.
And nowadays, the ITER device.
The ITER device is a tokamak, the largest experiment that is being built on our planet with the goal of showing that it's feasible to use the fusion reaction to produce energy on our planet.
And together with the development of fusion devices the study of space and astrophysical systems has been a strong drive for plasma physics.
Starting from the 60s, satellites have been launched and have provided us with a huge amount of data on the activity of the solar surface, of the solar wind or the dynamics of the earth and magnetic fields.
And these have become key areas for plasma physicists.
At the same time, plasma physicists have devoted their attention to the study of astrophysical systems.
Just to give an example, the astrophysical jets, the jets that are shot out from the stars, from active galactic nuclei or from black holes.
But this is not it!
Since the 80s, industry has made massive use of technologies based on plasmas.
Here are examples of where, in our everyday lives, plasma technology enters.
Starting from the plasma TVs that we all know.
Well, the semiconductor industry makes a huge use of plasma physics.
And also the plasma deposition technology is used on many of the materials that we encounter in our everyday life.
Plasma medicine is a growing field of plasma physics.
Let me conclude this first module of the Plasma Physics course.
This module has been devoted to introduce the plasma state.
Plasmas are ionized gases which can be found in the Universe much more frequently than what our everyday experience would suggest.
Now, why do we study plasma physics?
Well, the main drive of plasma physical research has been provided by fusion.
Fusion research, the quest for a source of energy which is clean, sustainable, with no production of greenhouse gases nor of long-lived radioactive waste.
But understanding plasma physics is essential to uncover the dynamics of astrophysical systems.
And plasmas are playing a crucial role in industry today.
Let me conclude-
Let me conclude by saying that studying plasma physics is extremely challenging.
From a theoretical point of view, dealing with plasma means dealing with electrically charged particles which move under the effect of the electromagnetic field that they have themselves produced.
It means dealing with a complex, non-linear medium, and therefore, the most sophisticated numerical techniques, the most advanced computers that exist today in the world, advanced analytical techniques, they have all been used to uncover the dynamics of plasma.
From an experimental point of view, well, as you can imagine, taking measurement of a plasma is very difficult, it's not possible in most cases, to stick probes inside a plasma.
Its temperature is too hot.
And therefore to infer what's going on inside a plasma, one has to use smarter ways, which typically require a multidisciplinary approach.
Well, disentangling the complex physics of plasmas will be the objective of this course.
