Welcome to this model, on basic concepts of Statistics.
During the course of this model, we will discuss the following topics.
First we'll introduce a few general notions on statistics, about populations, samples, variables, and distribution.
We'll then see the summaries that can be used in order to describe the distribution of a statistical variable, at the level of the sample.
We will see that these can be numerical, or graphical.
And we will investigate the key properties, strengths, and weaknesses of some such summaries.
Then, we'll talk of the means of describing the distribution at the level of population.
Particularly using what is called the Statistical Model.
We will see that such a statistical model, offers a parsimonious representation of the distribution at the population level by means of a few interpretable parameters.
This might have otherwise needed many different numerical summaries to describe.
We will review some important classes of such models.
We'll also see the relationship between the sample distribution, and the population distribution model.
How can we calibrate the population model in order to fit the observed distribution at the level of sample as best as possible.
This is a so called problem of point estimation.
Where we seek to estimate the value of the population parameters using the sample at hand as precisely as possible.
We'll discuss the quantification of the uncertainty inherent in our estimates.
The issue is that the estimate produced on the basis of our sample will never be perfectly accurate.
How can we quantify the uncertainty in this estimate?
How can we construct a range of plausible values for the population parameter with the prescribed degree of confidence?
Finally, we'll see the contrasting of hypothesis that we may have formulated before collecting our data with the data at hand.
How can we declare whether or not a scientific hypothesis or conjecture is compatible, or not with the data?
How can we do so well guaranteeing a certain level of protection from making wrong decisions due to the sampling uncertainty?
How can we quantify the statistical significance of an observed trend at the level of the sample?
In all cases, we will try to place emphasis on broad concepts, rather than on specific techniques or technical details.
Here we go.
