Let's get back to our sample of elephants in the park.
When we look at a qualitative variable such as the color of elephants, we will obtain 3 categories.
For example, green, white, and pink.
Our sample is made up of 10 elephants.
The frequency table gives the elephants distribution among these categories.
It is a simple descriptive piece of information.
The absolute frequency measures how many elephants are present in each category.
For example, 5 green,
2 pink, and 3 white.
The relative frequency gives the proportion of each category.
50% green, 20% pink, and 30% white.
How this shows that there are more green elephants, is the absolute frequency.
And they represent half the sample and this gives their relative frequency.
Now, let's have another look at a discrete quantitative variable, the ecological attribute Age, of the elephants.
We choose a sample of 13 elephants and we determine their age.
Then, we arrange the elephants in ascending order of age.
This is called, Statistics order.
Now, we are able to visualize the distribution of the sample according to the ascending value of the attribute.
The next step, to better understand this attribute is to know where the center of the sample is.
This is a measure of location, and how the sample values are distributed around the center.
This is a measure of dispersion.
The mean gives the average age of the elephants.
It is calculated by dividing some of the ages with the number of elephants monitored.
The median splits the population in half.
It is not affected by the variation of values of the attribute itself.
The variance gives a distribution of attribute values around the mean.
It is obtained by calculating the sum of the value square distances with the mean.
And then we divide it by N.
The standard deviation will be the square root of the variance.
It expresses the distribution at the same scale as the value itself.
Finally, the sample can be subdivided into Quantiles.
Usually, Quartiles are often used.
In this case, each group gathers around 25% of the sample.
This gives more detail information about the sample by showing its symmetry to the mean which the variance alone doesn't do.
Here, we can see that the sample of elephants (INAUDIBLE) a greater number of old animals.
