Further to numerical summaries, one can also create graphical summaries of the sample. 
This can often be more telling, as long as they are not abused. 
The qualitative variables, one often uses pie charts and bar charts. 
The qualitative variables, there is a much wider graphics that one can consider.
We will focus on two particular type of graphics; histograms and boxplots. 
Pie charts and bar charts essentially carry the same information as a frequency table does but they're conveyed on a visual way that is easier to appreciate. 
Let's consider again the sample of 25 individuals where the variables of interest is their blood type. 
The sample is summarized in the frequency table on the left.
The pie chart partitions the surface of the disk into sectors.
Each sector corresponds to one of the categories of the qualitative variable. 
Here, we have sector A corresponding to the value A. 
Sector B corresponding to the value B, and so on and so forth.
Assuming that the total area of the disk corresponds to one 100%, the sectors are drawn in such a way so that the area of each sector corresponds to the percentage of the corresponding category in the frequency table. 
So for instance, the area of sector B over here should be equal 32% relative to the total of 100%
A bar chart draws a separate bar for each category of a variable arranged side by side.
A, B, O, and AB, in the case of the blood group example.
Each bar is designed so that it's area is proportional to the corresponding relative frequency or equivalently to the corresponding
 absolute frequency.
In essence, pie charts and bar charts provide the exact same information. 
Their difference is merely a question of style. when dealing with
a quantitative variable, we see graphical summaries that allow us to easily visualize the concentration of sample values in different regions of the axis.
A basic such graphic is the histogram which is based on an idea that is not too dissimilar to the bar chart. 
It's aim is to help us visualize what proportion software contained in different sub-regions of the axis. 
Let's consider an example to see how an histogram is constructed.
The data set on the right shows the weight of 92  high school seniors divided between boys and girls and is measured pounds. 
To construct a histogram for this data set, we first divide the range of the data into non-overlapping intervals of equal length. 
And this example, which is nine intervals, then we count proportionate sample observations contained in each interval and draw a horizontal line over that interval at a height that is equal to that proportion.
Thus, the height of each resulting bin informs us of proportions of observations in that corresponding interval.
The histogram allows us to very directly appreciate the location, scatter, and symmetry or asymmetry of the sample distribution, all at the same time. 
The main weakness of histogram is there is no objective choice of how many intervals or bins
once you divide the range into.
A very small number of wide things gives information that is too coarse, as it flushes out finer information.
A very large narrow bins is not helpful either,
It obscures the general form by giving information
 that is too fine.
The choice of the number of bins should be made judiciously depending on the number of observations.
The general rule is that the larger the sample size n, the more the bins one should consider. 
Luckily, computer software automatically selects reasonable choice but a good analyst must always keep in mind to not over interpret characteristics visible in the histogram as these may depend on the arbitrary choice of number of bins. 
To see the impact of the choice of number of bins on the form of the histogram, let's compare the histogram we get from the previous data set for two different values of bin width. 
On the left, we have the original bin width with a range of the data being partitioned into 9 intervals. 
On the right, the range of the data is partitioned into 13 intervals.
This results into coarser bins on the left and finer bins on the right. 
Now while the overall shape of the two histograms is the same. we can see the two histograms present some subtle differences.
Since these differences are related to the choice of number of classes, we should not put too much emphasis on these when interpreting the histogram. 
The different means of visualizing the distribution of the sample is the boxplot. 
Contrary to the histogram, it has tuning parameters  to choose, and so it can be objectively constructed for any data set.
Now on the other hand, it is a closer  representation of the data set. 
How does it work?
Let's use the high school student data set again to demonstrate how exactly. 
The first step is to arrange the order statistics of the sample on an axis. 
This goes from the smallest observation to the largest observation in increasing order. 
Then, boxplot is basically an annotation of some key numerical summaries. 
We annotate the location of the median, as well as the location of the first and third quartile. 
This is done by using a box that hovers over the axis.
The end-points of the box correspond to the location of the second and third quartiles, while the line down the middle is the location of the median. 
Then, we annotate the smallest and the largest observations to fall within
1.5 times the inter-quartile range by vertical lines. 
These vertical lines are called whiskers. 
Any observations falling outside the whiskers are called outliers and are annotated individually. 
In this data set, the largest observation that corresponds to 220 pounds lies way beyond the right whisker. 
This is why it's annotated separately by a dot. 
A boxplot will allow us to appreciate some of the basic characteristics of a distribution. 
The middle line in the box represents the medium. 
So about half the south of values are to the left
and half to the right of that line. 
This gives an indication of the location sample distribution.
The lines representing the quartiles give us a division of the sample into quarters.
These can be used to gauge the dispersion of the sample as well as the symmetry or lack of it at the level of sample distribution.
When the overall shape of the boxplot is symmetric around the median, we have  a roughly symmetric distribution. 
Such is the case in the first boxplot on the right.
Otherwise, if one side of the boxplot is elongated related to the other, then we speak of skewed distribution to the left or to the right depending on which side of the medium the elongation appears in. 
The second boxplot on the right picks a sample that is skewed to the right.
The whiskers now is supposed to indicate where the bulk of the sample lies. 
When observations fall outside of the whiskers, these observations are called outliners because they lie outside the main crowd of points. 
The third boxplot on the right features five such outliers.
Outliers deserve further scrutiny and should not just be treated as average. 
They may indicate for example if there is an interesting phenomenon going on or that the distribution under study has what we call heavy tails. 
This means that the population under study has a non-trivial proportion of individuals whose variables takes on very different values than the rest. 
Still, it is a possibility that the outliers are due to data registration error. 
We can't know that and we must scrutinize more.
Boxplots are particularly useful for comparing distributions of different samples by displaying them side by side as is done in the right here. 
For instance, we can construct two separate boxplots for the boys and the girls in the sample
 of 92 high school students. 
This boxplot corresponds to the girls and this boxplot corresponds to the boys.
By comparing them side by side, we can see that both samples have roughly symmetric distributions or perhaps the sample of the boys appears to be slightly skewed to the right. 
It is clear that the location of the sample of boys is further up than the location of the samples of girls. 
Boys typically weigh more. 
It also as though the sample of errors is more concentrated around the median as is indicated by the inter-quartile range.
The histogram in the boxplot are useful means to summarize the sample distribution in a visual way.  
The histogram gives finer representation of the data distribution. 
The height of each rectangle gives us the proportion of sample observation falling into that corresponding interval. 
However, it's interpretation is susceptible to change depending on the choice of bin width
 which must be made judiciously.
In particular, one should not over-interpret fine details of a histogram which are typically unstable to perturbation of the bin width. 
We should not try to extract more information from this graphic than what it can actually offer. 
The boxplot is not as finer representation of the data, but has the advantage of not depending on junior parameters.
Since it does not depend on such junior parameters it allows to very easily compare between different sums. 
Finally a warning, when accessing the graphical summary of a sample, it's important to not over-interpret delicate features and details.
It's important to remember that minor features are subject to a random fluctuations that could be due to the random sampling. 
They may not persist in new or different samples. 
The human mind has a tendency to try and discover patterns everywhere, even when these patterns don't exist. 
Assessing data should be immune to such magical thinking. 
