Our whole premise is that we will use a distribution of a statistical variable at the level of a random sample in order to understand the distribution of the variable on the level of the population.
At the level of the sample a simple way of visualizing the data distribution as the histogram.
The height of each bar revealing the percentage of sample observations falling inside the corresponding bin.
Is there a similar device that we could use to represent the distribution of the entire population?
Although, the population is in principle very large and we can essentially think of it as being of infinite size so if we want to create a histogram for the population we could try to use one with a very large number of very narrow bins.
How many exactly?
As many as possible.
For a discreet variable that can only take the value zero zero, one, two, three, and so on and so forth each bin would have to correspond to one of these values exactly.
After all, we can never take finer bins than these.
For continuous variable on the other hand there is no limit to the number of bins we could take there could be as fine as we wish them.
So the histogram now becomes a smooth curve
 as seen in blue on the right.
We can interpret this as a histogram with infinitely many minutely fine bins.
In either case, continuous or discreet we speak of the population distribution.
In many cases we can actually describe the population distribution by closed form mathematical formula. having such a formula for a population allows us to better interpret the form of the distribution.
Just as in physics, a formula reveals a physical law of the phenomenon under study so does it reveal the law governing the population distribution.
This is why the population model formula is often called the law of the population.
Population models usually depend on parameters that allow us to fine tune the model to the population at hand.
Some examples of laws that are very often included in practice are the normal distribution, the exponential distribution and the Poisson distribution. let's consider these in a bit more detail.
The normal distribution is a law for continuous random variables.
It's formula tells us that the distribution is symmetric around a certain value μ.
Changing the value of μ shifts the location of the peak of the distribution.
For instance, this one has μ equal to zero, whereas this one has μ approximately equal to -2. changing the value of σ squared will actually compress or stretch the distribution, so for example the distribution in blue has a lower σ squared value than the distribution in red.
The exact values are given on the top right.
The normal distribution is one of the most important models as it describes extremely large variety of situations.
The exponential distribution is a law for continuous random variables that take on only positive values.
It usually models variables that represent the time until some event.
The lifetime of a battery for an example.
It's formula depends on a positive parameter λ.
This parameter is called the rate.
It actually controls how likely it is to observe larger values of the variable of time.
For a large value of λ, the distribution concentrates around zero, such is the case of the curve in green.
On the other hand, for small values of λ the distribution tails off more slowly, such is the case with the curve in blue.
The Poisson distribution is a law for discreet random variables taking the value zero, one, two, three, and so on, and so forth.
It is typically used when considering the statistical variables that count occurrences, for instance the number of bacteria in a bottle of pasteurized milk could be modeled by a Poisson distribution.
This distribution also depends on a single parameter λ.
This is also a positive parameter and it controls how large or small the values of the variable will typically be.
Small values of λ will concentrate the distribution close to zero while larger values will shift it to the right, widen it, and make it look more symmetric, for instance on the left we see what the Poisson distribution of λ equals one looks like.
Clearly, we have the zero and one are the more likely values and then the proportions of different values tail off rather quickly.
For the larger value of λ equals 2.5 we see that the distribution is shifted more to the right likely values now are bigger values and it appears that we have more of a symmetric pattern.
But how do we calculate proportions with these population models?
In the case of discreet variable, the answer is quite simple just as with the histogram.
In the case of the continuous variable though, our distribution model is given by a curve.
Now we can choose any arbitrary interval that we wish, for example the interval I.
We could ask, what proportion of population has variable values contained in the interval I? the answer is that this proportion should be given by the area under the curve delineated by the interval end points.
What this means is that we need to draw vertical lines at the interval end points, and then find what area is contained between these two lines the axis and the curve.
This is going to give us the proportion of population values contained in I.
Just as we defined notion such as the mean, median, variants and quantiles of a sample distribution so can we also do in the case of the population model.
Now we will not give precise definitions but we will simply note that all theses quantities can be obtained using the mathematical formula for the population model.
The key aspect is to highlight that all these concepts will now depend on the unknown parameter.
It will be functions of the parameter since the population curve changes as the parameter changes it's numerical summaries must also change as a function of the parameter.
Now, some of these functions may not have explicit formulas but others do, so here's some key numerical summaries for the three models we saw earlier.
For the Poisson distribution the mean is equal to the variants which in turn is equal to the parameter λ.
For the exponential distribution, the mean is equal to the inverse of λ, whereas the variant is equal to one divided by λ squared. 
We even have a formula for the α percent quantile which is given to my right.
In the normal distribution the mean equals the median and equals μ.
The variants equal to σ squared.
The quantiles of the normal distribution do not have the simple closed formula, but there is one very important property that we will now mention.
Whatever the value of the mean parameter μ and the various parameter σ squared might be the following statements will always remain true.
First of all, the proportion of population values within one standard deviation of the mean, is always equal to 68%.
On the other hand, the proportion of population values within two standard deviations of the mean, is always equal to 95%.
Finally, the proportion of population values within three standard deviations of the mean, is always equal to 99%.
So what we're having in population how do we know what is a good model to use as it's law?
This choice is often based on prior information as well as first principles, for instance, it is known that some populations have properties that uniquely correspond to a given model and so that is the model that should be chosen.
Other times we know that the certain model is a good approximation for a wide variety of phenomena with some characteristics.
Sometimes, a model is not motivated by the first principles or mathematical theory, but by extensive practical experience.
We simply know that this model has been successful in the past.
In some cases, when we have selected a model, but the exploratory graphical numerical analysis of the sample might reveal the features of this model are not compatible with the sample's structure.
This means, that we may need to reconsider or modify our initial choice of model.
This interplay between modeling principles and exploratory analysis is what statisticians call model selection.
Luckily for many standard problems there exists a models who's appropriateness has been established by both mathematical investigation and practical experience.
The powerful thing about a model is that it allows us to calculate everything we need to know about a population provided that we know the value of the parameter it depends on.
This value is typically unknown unfortunately but luckily we have our sample. 
The problem of statistical inference is to use out sample in as best of ways possible in order to inform ourselves about true value of this parameter.
Once we can say something about this parameter we can answer any question we want about the population distribution.
The triple of statistical inference questions one typically wishes to answer are first, point estimation determine the precise value of the unknown parameter and quantify how far off we might be in doing so on average secondly, interval estimation, given interval of plausible values for the parameter will quantify the chance that this would contain the true value finally, hypothesis testing, determine whether a certain hypothesized value or range of values for the parameter is compatible or not with a sample that we observe and also determine the chance of making a mistake in this determination.
