In this second week of our sanitation course we presented sanitation products, the five functional groups of the sanitation chain, and finally, a first introduction to different sanitation technologies.
The primary input products are those that are, for example, generated by us human beings, such as urine or feces.
Secondary output products are those that are generated as a function of storage or treatment of different products.
Example, compost or pit humus.
We also provided an overview of the different terminology that we use in sanitation differentiating between blackwater and greywater and between blackwater, brownwater, and excreta, and what is often confused, the difference between urine, feces, and excreta.
We then went on to propose the five functional groups used to categorize sanitation technologies starting in red on the bottom with the user interface, going on to the collection and storage in orange, the conveyance in yellow, the semi-centralized treatment in green, and finally, the use and disposal of the treated waste.
In the second part of this week, we've provided an overview of different technologies, starting with the user interface or toilet and we showed a number of different toilets that are used around the world -- dry toilets, UDDTs, urinals or pour flush toilets.
We then went on to present different collection and storage technologies as the one shown here, the single ventilated improved pit on the left, or the double ventilated improved pit,
VIP, on the right.
We also presented some of the more advanced anaerobic treatment technologies such as the biogas reactor, shown on the left, or the septic tank, shown on the right.
Finally, we also provided an overview of different transport and conveyance technologies ranging from the non-sewered, motorized emptying and transport shown here on the left, to simplified sewers or sewers in general, like the one shown here in Nepal.
Next week we'll be looking at different sanitation systems and providing an overview of sanitation technologies, part two.
