So, in this slide we're going to look deeper into ontologies.
So, Sean has already given you basic information about what ontologies are and we will not expand on this.
What I'm really interested in doing here is to show you for the domain of neuroscience which ontologies we have decided to integrate in our Blue Brain Nexus platform.
So, a lot of the ontologies we have integrated have been either taken from the Neuroscience Information
Framework co-developed with them.
The goal of NIF is to define these concepts for them in neuroscience and share them so the community can re-use them and have a commun agreement to define neuroscientific concepts.
They have defined the NIF Standard Ontologies which integrate a number of existing ontologies such as Uberon, for instance to define brain regions in manner that is agnostic of which specimen or species they come from.
Gabi for instance for description of small molecules, the gene ontology or Obi and quite a few others.
Now in this part, here under, what I would like to illustrate is a number of ontologies we have decided to use in the Brain Nexus platform for the domain of neuroscience.
So, for instance, around the specimens we have the definition of species and strain, so this is really helping in defining what kind of animal subject that was, so these two we haven't created ourselves: this is part of the NSBI taxonomy.
And so it is, when dealing with ontologies, really important to do enough research to find out : are there any vocabularies already existing in the community so that we can just leverage them.
It really would be a waste of time first to reinvent what is already working and well accepted by the community, but is also a strong advantage in using and re-using these these already defined vocabularies.
And very simply if someone describes rats with a very specific concept and you have also defined rats with again that same concept so then even though you're storing your data in different places they become compatible:
You know that what you call a rat is also what they call a rat.
And so, if, for instance, in your lab you deal with electrophysiology only, and that other person deals only with morphology, the data, at least, is compatible at the level of the species and it is very clear to deduce from the use of the vocabulary you have chosen.
And then next one will just be...
Yeah, a vocabulary to define the sex of the specimen-male, female.
Then we have a number of ontologies for the description of datasets, so we have the category, so what kind of dataset is it, is it an electrophysiology, morphology, image, imagery data?
This specific data format that is used to serialize this data, the raw data when you save it on your disc there's a concrete format that you have chosen and so there's a way to metadata to describe this.
This becomes very important if you look for electrophysiology in a very specific format because you have a work that requires it you can then filter that though in a platform and only get those that match and will be compatible with what you're trying to achieve.
Next, we have a license ontology which allows us to define who can re-use the data you're publishing into the platform.
So, do not underestimate this one.
If you decide that your data cannot be re-used for commercial purpose you can actually define it there.
Finally, we have the storage of the dataset and this is really a way to describe where have you stored your data.
So it can be through the platform in which case you don't really need to know where it's configured, you just have to know that the people managing the platform have configured it in a way that the data is going to be backed up and is safe.
But if you were to store the data on a next storage to the platform, here we have an ontology to actually allow you to describe this, so you can easily define the data.
For instance, it is store in a cloud in Amazon and you can define that.
Then we have the concept of sample classification which is really important to us, because from a lot of the datasets we are integrating scientists take the time to make statements on the entities that we integrate, neurons for instance, and it will give them electric types, morphology types.
And so we have the design ontology that allows that description.
Finally, another way to classify them is to define what kind of neurotransmitters, some entities are also as another kind of ontology, but we won't be getting to the details of it here.
A lot of the data we integrate really makes sense when we anchor it in specific brain spaces.
So, we have a number of existing brain atlases that are references for specific species whether it is Allen mouse CCFv3 or Waxholm for the rats.
We have an ontology that defines the logical reference for these spaces and this can be annotated on the level of a dataset, for instance.
More detailed in that concept is the parcellation schemes, so here we enter still within the concept of anchoring data into an atlas, now we want to actually talk about in which specific region of an atlas your dataset is to be anchored.
And so, different atlas spaces come with parcellation schemes where anatomists have just looked at these spaced and defined the subvolumes of this space that corresponds to specific brain regions or brain parcels.
And so we have three here, which are put as examples, we have actually quite a few others and these define again vocabulary to describe these brain regions, but they are really specific to that very specific atlas space.
Finally, we have some ontologies that are really linked more to the provenance concepts that really allows to then reach it.
So, for instance, we have the type of the activity run, whether these experimental type run in a lab or a computational task, you know, simply run in a computer or a classification activity, so you have these very short vocabularies that really enable you to describe the activity you want to define and later on filter through the semantic searches.
Then we have measurement methods so another ontology to describe the kind of message you've applied to generate new entities.
And finally, the role of the agents involved in a given activity: whether it was the principal investigator of a project or researcher doing the actual experiments in the lab.
So, this is not fully exorstive but it is a set of ontologies we use to annotate our data in the context of neuroscience.
So here, just to tie it altogether and show you that we have a central place where you can actually introspect all these ontologies, we have what we call the Ontology Viewer.
So, if you open this web application you can list all the ontologies currently available and integrated into the platform.
And so here we have regrouped them by logical topics, so we have a number of parcellation schemes and you can see, if I take the Waxholm space you can look into white matter and... so here you can see there is video hierarchy of this brain region and relation is that that region is further defined by these three other subregions.
And you can through here really introspect every ontologies we have done, so if you want to have a look at electrophysiology it has a parent term that is physiologycal data.
And here you have the specific dataset category that allows you to define all, this dataset is electrophysiology recording
The nice thing you can do with that is that if you have used this vocabulary to describe your data and you're interested in not only electrophysiology, but also, say, functional imaging, you could leverage to hierarchy of this ontology by, for instance, using the term Physiologycal Data and the system is intelligent enough to know that's because you have annotated with electrophysiology it knows that electrophysiology is a subtype of Physiologycal Data and so it will pull back from the system all electrophysiology as well as function imaging, effective connectivity and functional connectivity.
So you can really leverage the power of ontologies and more abstract concepts to make interesting scientific questions.
