Next, I will take you through the steps of creating your own domain.
Here, I'm still going to stay in the realm of neuroscience but, typically, the way this happens is that scientists come to us and just describes their needs with the platform and that, altogether, allows us to define a specific entity.
Here, I've taken the example of a neuron and through the discussion with the scientists we have identified that it needs to have a name, it needs to have a morphology type and an electrical type, each of which are going to be based on specific ontologies that already predefine these morphology types and electrical types.
And so, once this has been written, typically by a knowledge engineer in the Blue Brain Nexus project, then this can be pushed into the platform registers so people can start using it.
The next step is now I have two scientists that both are working on their own favorite neurons and they have done experiments, and they have identified that in the top part here, that neuron is a pyramidal cell it is also a stuttering cell.
You can then, either through a private interface or through a ware application, enter this information push it into the platform, other scientists can do the same thing, and should they set the ACL, the Access Control Lists correctly on their own respective entities and share it, say with people from their group, and let's assume that these three people are working in the same group then that person can then request from the platform:
"Show me all neurons" and you're getting the two entities back that these two scientists have defined.
So, it is a simplistic example, but all of that, we have been able to do without having to modify the platform without writing code, and just designing new things declaring things into the platform, and automatically people can start using it and getting value out of it, and we feel amazing.
So, we've just seen an example on how to define your own domain.
Now, many domains have already been defined by other communities.
I just want to take a few minutes to describe a few existing domains that you might want to consider re-using.
Here, this is probably the most used vocabulary on the internet today in the age of Facebook and LinkedIn.
It is called FOAF, or Friend of a Friend and it simply describes a person and their social network.
It's a very simple concept, but FOAF has defined a very specific vocabulary that allows you to define someone or a piece of software.
So for instance here, we can define the name of a person their title, you can have images that depict that person and you can have a family name, a given name here, quite an important piece of vocabulary is the other people that that person knows so this is how you start describing your social network and connecting that person to other people.
And I will not read all these attributes but there's a number of others you can potentially be using whether that person has a chatline from Jabber so you can connect with them, or that person works for a very specific organization so potentially in the Blue Brain Nexus you can take this vocabulary, select the properties that are interesting to you and register the concept of an agent or a person, leveraging this vocabulary making very clear that it comes from the FOAF and just start using it.
So the previous example was really outside of the neuroscience field and here for the sake of illustrating neuroscience
I want to take another domain that really is in the realm of neuroscience and so NIDM is one of such domains that deal with the neuroimaging data model.
And I'm really not planning to get into the deep details of how this is described, but we can see here that the whole community has come together to define a very specific kind of workflow.
So it covers the acquisition of imagery data it caters for the representation of the raw data that has been acquired the description of specific analysis and workflows, it allows you to represent derived data from what you have acquired and to do so it leverages the W3C Prov just like we do in the Blue Brain Nexus.
You can also capture the publications that have been created from whatever workflow's derived data you have created and as well as the distribution and sharing of the queries via a common API.
This is more of a platform,
I guess, of their own but as the specific data model, here all of these could be leveraged in the Blue Brain Nexus by just importing this very specific domain and declaring it as within the name space of NIDM and just re-use it.
A community, like I said, has already spent time defining these carefully, and by leveraging it you render also the data you push into the platform and make it compatible with data sitting on potentially other data repositories which is a very powerful way to combine data.
Here we have a very brief overview of the NIDM domain representation, and here they are leveraging the visual representation of the W3FC Prov.
And so you can see just the main elements which are the project on which you're working the specific study and the acquisition of the data.
And here again, they have emphasized that they are using the following provenance elements and you find again that you should be familiar with it they consist of agents of activity, of entity, and attributes.
So, again, a really powerful way to leverage existing domains and vocabularies and bring them into your Blue Brain Nexus instance.
