Hello. 
Today, we will consider system and network planning for protected areas.
The documents you should look at to complement this lesson, are the IUCN guidelines on system planning.
This document is currently only available in English.
So, why are we interested in planning protected areas at this scale?
Béatrice Chataigner from IUCN PAPACO, based in Nairobi, will explain it to us.
It is important to understand today that natural resources are increasingly in demand and increasingly exploited by the human population which is also increasing exponentially.
We therefore need to ration the use of these natural resources so that they can be used sustainably in the long term; this rationed use is needed for all territories, and, in particular, protected areas, and all the more since the populations most affected by the exponential use of these resources are those that live in the outskirts of these protected areas.
And it is these populations that are the most vulnerable and that need these resources to survive from day to day.
That's something we often hear, but which natural resources are we actually talking about?
Which natural resources are we willing to protect?
Of course, there are exploitable natural resources, whether they are renewable or not, whether it is wood, ores, water, fauna...
These exploitable resources are advantageous mainly to those who sell and to those who buy them, and that's usually a very limited number of people.
There are also, all the natural resources that aren't exploitable and yet that we use every day and that are beneficial to everyone.
And what are they?
It's the quality of the air we breathe, the purity of the water we drink, the fertility of the soil we cultivate, it's the natural barriers against flooding or other climatic events, and they are extremely important to preserve.
This is made possible by these ecosystem services, and these ecosystem services exist only because the ecosystems that produce them are in good health.
And so, the fundamental tools to keep these ecosystems healthy, are actually protected areas and the link that exists between them, to form an effective and relevant network for protecting these ecosystems on a large scale.
If we look at the practical aspects rather than the theoretical ones, how do we efficiently plan this network of protected areas by considering land development issue?
When we mention planning a system of protected areas, the procedure we will use is exactly the same as the one that we will use for single protected areas.
This means that we will first identify the values of the protected area systems.
This happens with all of the interested parties involved in the system and from that, we will be able to determine the pressures they endure today and those they will endure tomorrow, called threats.
From this analysis, we will be able to determine what we have to do to thwart these pressures, and therefore, to preserve these values.
This allows us to determine conservation objectives for protected areas systems, and therefore the actions required to reach these objectives.
Specific tools exist to take into account these aspects, for example, the gap analysis approach that you can read about.
It allows to identify the key ecosystems and the possible connections between these ecosystems.
It therefore means we can determine what we need to prioritise in terms of conservation through the protected areas network.
It's fascinating, but to be honest, it's a bit complicated.
I asked Lacina to briefly explain all of this to us.
The way that we produce, what we call a gap analysis allows us to compare the appropriateness of the distribution of protected areas and of the distribution of the key biodiversity areas to be preserved in the territory.
By compiling the available data on biodiversity, we can then identify the biodiversity areas based on vulnerability and irreplaceability criteria.
What makes a site irreplaceable is its unique character, this means no other site can play the same conservation role as that site in that territory.
A site or a species' vulnerability is linked to the threats that that site or that species endure and that are in danger of making them disappear definitively if the sites or species are not protected.
Then, we superimpose this key biodiversity areas network and the current protected areas network to map the gaps, i.e. the key biodiversity areas that are not yet included in the protected areas network.
Finally, we just need to prioritise the required actions to fill the gaps and to formalise them into a national conservation strategy.
This will allow us to adjust the national protected areas networks based on the gap analysis results.
You've understood correctly; this approach means we reflect on the protected areas network to then eventually be able to modify it depending on conservation priorities.
All of this will be reflected on maps, like
Lacina told us.
Let's take the example of Cameroon.
Let's overlap various maps taken from the
Forest Atlas of Cameroon where first of all, we see here the country's vegetative coverage, and then the different types of forests established in Cameroon.
For example, the forest reserves, here in light green, the community forests that I am circling in red, the communal forests here in brown, that have just been added.
Let's then add the protected areas network which is quite familiar to us, here is the Dja River, the Faro River, Bénoué,
Bouba Ndjida, etc.
Let's add the active logging zones over the top, and there are a lot of them.
You can see them here in brown, and then, for example, the hunting zones that we see here in orange.
These territories, hunting zones or logging zones, bear witness to the use of the territory in relation to nature.
Finally, we can also, for example, consider all the mining permits that exist currently in the country.
So, if we overlayed all of that on the key biodiversity areas, we could finally draw a coherent protected areas network that takes into account, not only the ecological stakes, but also the main pressures like those we have just seen.
We will therefore be more prepared to address this country's conservation challenge.
This process must obviously be participatory and must take into account all of the participants connected to the management of protected areas near and far.
The main difficulty is actually to have, at the same time, all of the data needed to decide where the priorities are and to gather together all the people in on place to take these decisions.
Gap analysis is therefore a powerful tool to determine a network, to draw it and build it, or at least it is in theory.
But once this network exists, how can we evaluate how it functions and eventually its efficiency?
Once the protected areas network is under way and that the system has been launched, we have another question to answer: are we really achieving the goals we wanted to by implementing this network in terms of the conservation of the country's ecosystems?
To know whether or not we manage it, we'll put in place a monitoring and evaluation system of the network management actions.
Some tools exist to do this, like RAPAM, for example, which allow us to understand this efficiency.
RAPAM has been implemented by protected area management agencies themselves, and it allows them to regularly monitor their protected areas system and therefore to gradually correct it.
There are also other monitoring and evaluation tools that exist for protected areas, but they are more tools for just one site.
It's therefore another approach, where other participants are called upon to evaluate the efficiency of this management.
To summarize, a protected area obviously only protects part of the ecosystems that are necessary to insure that all of the values of a territory are preserved.
We therefore need to develop representative and comprehensive systems just as the Convention on Biological Diversity asks us to do through the conservation targets they have set, the famous Aichi Targets, that we will look into at the end of this course.
We see an interesting example in the marine protected area network that was developed on the Atlantic side of
Africa.
We already know Charlotte Karibuhoye who is one of the key players of this network and will quickly tell us about how the network developed and how it works today.
RAMPAO is the Regional Marine Protected Area
Network for West Africa.
The network has given itself the mission to maintain a coherent entity, for the critical ecosystems that are important for the ecological processes to function.
This is to preserve biodiversity, but also to insure that the legacy and the associated ecosystem services are maintained.
So, just like I said, it's a network that hopes to cover the West African marine ecoregion that covers seven countries in the West African sub-region.
So there's Mauritania, Senegal,
Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Cape Verde islands.
This network therefore tries to finally combine all of the sites that have already been developed into marine protected areas.
There is therefore a bio-geographical or - physical aspect, if you prefer - but there is also a human aspect, because it gathers people, representatives, managers from all these sites that are therefore members of that network.
The Regional Marine Protected Area Network
RAMPAO has been set up within the PRCM framework.
PRCM is the Regional Program for Coastal and
Marine Conservation in Western Africa, now known as the Regional Partnership for
Coastal and Marine Conservation.
RAMPAO was therefore created after a long consultation process between different participants because the participants noticed they shared many of the same problems, and the same challenges in terms of preserving marine and coastal resources.
They shared a lot of cross-border habitats.
It is also noticeable that there are migratory species that cross the borders.
So we see that finally even, for example, the users, the fishers don't necessarily respect the political boundaries.
The participants from these countries thought that there needs to be a joint approach to be able to battle these problems.
From 2002, there were therefore several meetings, several...consultations...
Namely, in 2004, 2005, and 2006, there were specific meetings for the managers of the marine protected areas to think of goals and think about how the network would work.
And all of this culminated in 2007 when the network was officially created during the consultative assembly in Cape Verde in April 2007.
And so, we see that, today also, this network was able to also gain political recognition, since there was a regional strategy for marine protected areas.
This was established in 2002 and was officially approved by the ministers in charge of the protected areas, of fishing and of the environment in those countries.
They signed a general policy declaration that emphasized the importance of this network.
The advantages of the Regional Marine Protected
Area Network for preserving MPAs are numerous.
We can organise them into two different groups.
I see it that we can have a group called "the social benefits" and a group simply called "the ecological benefits".
I'm using the term social because we are referring to human beings.
I'm particularly meaning strengthening abilities of the managers of marine protected areas since the network was able to implement a series of activities for strengthening abilities in key areas that are very important for preserving marine protected areas.
This is mainly in terms of management plans, the development of management plans, the development of business plans, marine supervision, which is important for marine protected areas of course, and the issue of shared governance.
All of these are questions that really were addressed in a systematic manner to train the managers of these marine protected areas in these domains.
But there are also the exchanges, the mutual reinforcement, there is particularly the economies of scale.
This means that, finally, instead of each country or each site organising training, there are training sessions that will benefit many people.
But there is also the fact that the network was able to represent, at a national and an international level, the needs of the marine protected areas of the sub-region, and really make known the progress but also the challenges that the marine protected areas face.
At an ecological level, I think it is completely obvious, this network today covers almost 5 million acres of marine and, of course, coastal areas.
Over half of it is in fact maritime.
Then, there are 27 sites that are protected and that are members of the network.
There were projects before the creation of the network that showed the link, the connectivity that exists between these different sites.
So the network finally contributes to protecting species that need all of these sites to develop.
There are species that are born in one site, that develop in another, and that will reproduce elswhere.
All of these species benefit from this network.
There are also some important ecological processes: species migration, larval dispersion...
All of these are benefits that this network is offering.
But there is also an issue that is topical at the moment, we're talking a lot these days about climate change and like me, you know that healthy ecosystems are more resilient to climate change.
So the network allows, on one hand, to preserve a sample of healthy ecosystems but also, as a network, it can preserve several samples from the same ecosystem, from the same habitat.
This means that if anything were to ever disturb a site, it still has the ability to be resilient.
That resilience is maintained thanks to several samples existing from that same habitat.
All that is to basically say that this network has very clear and very obvious ecological benefits, that we will have to, of course, I think, measure and quantify in a much more systematic manner.
Consider the protected areas networks that you know of on a country or region scale like RAMPAO that Charlotte has just spoken to us about.
Are they complete, are they logical?
What were the important aspects in forming the network?
Are they simply opportunistic?
It happens.
Do they meet the objectives we have just mentioned?
There we go, that's the end of this lesson.
The next video will look into following up on results and the impacts of planning.
Have a brilliant day!
