In this lecture, we're going to have a look at how to design practically, a domain.
And more particularly,  we're going to have a look at the acquisition of electrophysiology data, and morphology reconstruction for a given neuron.
So, as part of this lecture we're going to have a more detailed look into the use case we're going to model.
We're going to go through the steps of... an interview with a scientist that explains what they've been doing in the lab.
And then with another scientist that expresses the type of question we would like to be able to answer through the use of the platform once the data has been integrated.
Then, we're going to go through the steps of designing a model, both in defining the provenance patterns that essentially defines the domain we're going to design.
And then into the specifics of the entities we're going to create.
Finally, we're going to have a look at the provenance editor which is a tool you're going to be using in a graded exercise this week.
So here, at the top of the page, you can see information of the specimen that has been used to capture the information.
In this case, it is a mouse line.
And you can see the type of neuron that has been recorded, and the part that really interests us here is this data captured.
Here, you can see that there's a number of stimuli that have been applied to this neuron in order to record its electric response.
And here we will stick with the long square one.
On the top part of the screen, you can see the specific stimuli, and at the bottom you can see how the cell responded.
So here on the screen as it is now, we have all the sequential sweeps that have been applied with the specific stimuli to this one neuron.
What you can then do is to pick the sweeps one by one and really look at what the specific stimulation was like, and how the neuron really reacted.
And as you flick through them one by one, you can see that the intensity of the stimulation does increase all the way to the neuron actually responding to the stimulation.
And, the higher we get, the stronger the stimulation gets.
So this is typically used also in the lab to identify what is called the real base of a neuron which is really the thresh hold above which the neuron starts responding with spikes.
So next, we'll have a brief look at what these morphology reconstructions look like. So I'm going to now open again this webpage. I have left here the url for the Allen Institute website, where you can actually look at this data.
And this is not really data integrated now in our platform but we're going to work through the steps of doing it.
So let's have a look at this page.
So here, essentially, is the morphological reconstruction of the very same neuron.
And so, on the left hand side, we can see that we have the actual digital captures of the slice, of the neuron in the slice as it was done in the lab.
And so using these images, someone has actually retraced the neuron by hand and recreated a 
3D representation of it.
So if I put it back in it's original shape you can really see here...
You can really easily match the shape.
It is the same representation.
This one is really the original image, and this one is a reconstructed one done by a scientist in the lab.
So these are the two data sets we're going to try to integrate into our platform.
And to do so, we're going to design a domain to capture enough information.
So in this part, we're going to pretend to have an interview with a scientist to discuss the origin of the data.
So we have our scientist depicted here on the left, and right next to it, I'm going to show you the summary sentences of a discussion we've had with this scientist.
And on the bottom part,
I'm going to show the provenance pattern we are inferring from the statements the scientist is giving us.
So the first statement is that the experiment was done on a rat of the strain Wistar Han.
And it was aged p14, post natal 14 days.
And so quite logically, it leads us to creating an entity which for now I will call a rat, that allows us to store the information such as the species, the strain and the age of the subject.
So, next.
The scientist is telling us that, they have recorded several characteristics of single neurons.
Just going to do this one.
So next, the scientist tell us that they have recorded several characteristics of single neurons.
So, quite naturally,  we are going to create a neuron entity which self derives from the rat, on which we're going to be able later on to store these characteristics.
The next fact is that recorded electrophysiology of a single neuron has been done and raw data has been captured.
So, again, we can derive an electrophysiology recording from that neuron, and we can indicate here that raw data has to be attached to this data set.
Next, they have reconstructed that morphology of that very same neuron.
And same neuron here is quite important because from the provenance pattern, it means that from the very same neuron, the same entity derives both electrophysiology and a morphology reconstruction which also has raw data attached.
So far, so good.
Last thing, is that classification of the neurons has been made based on recorded data.
And these classifications are of two types: electric type, and we have been informed that an ontology already exists for it, and we'll also give it a morphology type.
And there again we have an ontology pre existing.
So we take note of it, and we know we're going to try to integrate with it at a later stage.
