Hello, and welcome to my part.
I’m Lida Kanari.
I’m doing a PhD in Blue Brain Project and I’m gonna talk about neuronal morphologies.
In the first part,
I’m gonna talk about the different parts of neuronal morphologies.
How you can visualize them using an open source tool called
NeuroEM that is available in GitHub.
How you can extract basic morphometrics, and then in the second part,
I’m gonna talk about some statistical tests that you can run on those morphometrics in order to compare different morphologies.
This is a neuronal tree which consists of a soma and a neurite.
As you can see, we have different points on the tree.
So the blue points annotate the tips or the terminations as we call them.
The black points are the bifurcation points where two different branches emerge, and the red points are just continuations.
So a pair of points defines a segment.
If we put all the segments between two bifurcations together, we generate a section.
A section is a fundamental compartment of a neuron, so we’re gonna use those fundamental compartments in order to understand the morphology.
First, we’re gonna study the global features of the morphology.
So those features are length, the area, or the volume.
In order to compute the total length, we take the distance between two points and we sum up this distance for all of the points of the tree.
If we wanna compute the area or the volume, we need to use the diameters of the points.
So we generate a truncated cone, something like that, and so we sum up the area or the volume throughout the whole tree.
Some other global features is the count the number of bifurcations or terminations.
And then we can go into details and study the section structure.
So for the sections, we can do exactly the same.
Sum up the lengths, or the areas, or the volume of the sections, but now, we also have some other types of features: those are the angles.
The angles can be computed locally and those are called local bifurcation angles, or remotely at the end of the two sections and those are called remote.
Then we can compute the branch order and the branch order is defined from the start of the tree and onwards.
So for each bifurcation, you add one more branch order.
So the first one would be one, and then the second one would be two, three, and so on.
About the tortuosity, we are interested on what happens within the section.
So this section is one that wiggles a lot, and that has a very high tortuosity.
But a section that is completely straight has a tortuosity equal to one because the end-to-end distance and the path distance are the same.
So the tortuosity is defined as the radial distance between its two points by the path distance.
And now another measurement that is very important is the asymmetry of the tree.
So we can compute that at each bifurcation point again, and the asymmetry defines how many branches go on the right, and how many branches go on the left.
So a tree that is completely symmetric would be something like that, and a tree that would be completely asymmetric would be something like that.
So all those types of measurements are fundamentally important for the anatomy of the neuron.
And we’re gonna use NeuroEM in the first tutorial in order to get all those features.
