- Hello, Paul!
- Hello, Geoffroy!
Hello everyone.
Today's class will address overall land use planning.
Earlier we saw how to do the planning for one area, or even a network of areas.
Now we'll scale it up, expand it, and we'll focus on the entire land where the protected area is located.
Paul NDiaye, who we'll meet in the next module on governance, will help clarify this for us.
When it comes to conservation, each country must set a clear direction for the management of their natural resources, in light of the international rules to which they are subject.
Specialized agencies, like the Ministry of
Water and Forests, or that of National Parks, are given the task to develop an overall plan once all matters of governance are resolved.
We'll discuss this later, in a module on governance.
It's true that, today, national land use planning is largely dependent on international conventions.
For example, the Convention on Biological
Diversity which I spoke of in Module 1, the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, or the Aichi Biodiversity Targets which we'll soon discuss.
These conventions set priorities and commitments via national biodiversity strategies, which act as guidelines for land use planning, while placing special importance on protected areas.
Okay.
So, overall planning organizes the sharing and use of resources and spaces, and eventually, their conservation.
We'll consider two important elements: the pillars of planning, and the benefits of conservation.
The pillars on which all planning should be based are these three principles: legality, quality of the state; legitimacy, as recognized by local communities; and the partnership with all parties who may be concerned or affected.
These principles are relatively hard to reconcile, yet they are essential.
The benefits lie in conservation itself, the final goal of planning, as well as, of course, the benefit to local communities, who must be the natural beneficiaries in the context of the sound use of resources.
Yes, exactly!
Integrated overall planning, if well executed, will begin by focusing on five points which in part prevent any conflict of interest or skills which might arise.
We must also think about these spaces in a holistic way, taking into account the perspectives of all those who use them.
Planning should not emphasize separations, which are often artificial, but on the contrary, create links.
For example, let's consider coastlines, which may at first appear, wrongfully, to be discontinuous territories.
The "maritimization" of territory: this option consolidates defined land-use strategies with a concern for their extension into marine waters.
This results in the creation of Marine Protected
Areas (MPAs), consistent with conservation measures taken onshore.
The territorialization of marine spaces: some, such as fishermen, do not recognize the control of marine areas which inevitably leads to the depletion of fish stocks.
Marine protected areas were developed in response, as in Kayar, Senegal, that we can in this photo.
Onshore territories have a tendency to extend offshore, particularly when adjacent to protected marine areas, and vice versa.
The influence of marine areas extends well into the interior, in that an overall holistic plan must be based on the reciprocal link between the two elements: land and sea.
Let's take a quick look at how this planning works, which normally involves several stages which can be mapped out as follows.
Once the principles and overall approach are agreed upon, then planning operations may begin, which normally involve several stages which can be mapped out as follows.
Identifying the function of the spaces in question.
First, the management zoning scheme: integral or specific protection zone;
Next, the establishment of governance bodies, and finally, establishment of managing bodies.
Depending on local context and urgency, this process can go through more or less important changes.
Seascapes are not yet humanized, but the approach is the same as that for landscapes, with one added concern due to future challenges and particular technical difficulties, most notably when it comes to access constraints.
Clearly, incorporating protected areas -that are relatively fixed - within larger spaces that continuously evolve based on need, desires, regulations or government changes, etc., can be a very difficult task.
Yet there is no point in planning for protected areas when these are surrounded by total chaos.
Absolutely.
Let's take an example to illustrate this: the cohabitation, if we may speak of cohabitation, of protected areas and the extractive industries, which is rapidly expanding in Africa.
Take a look at our study on this subject if it interests you.
Here is a map from this study which you can access fully at www.papaco.org.
Here we have a photo of the Dja Reserve, and of the Sangha Trinational in Cameroon.
Note that the protected areas shown on this map are surrounded by mining areas, the colored areas here, some of which encroach on the very reserves, despite these being world heritage sites.
One arrives at a situation like this simply via a lack of coordinated territorial planning. which leaves the field open to, in this case, the Ministry of Mines, to issue permits which do not take into account other agreements,
--here, for conservation-- of this territory.
Unfortunately, this is a very common scenario.
Let's look at another example in Cameroon, this time in the north of the country.
All of the above also applies to other forms of development: urbanization, the development of infrastructure, the spread of agriculture, etc.
Overall territorial planning must be seen as an absolute necessity for protected areas as an "empty-chair" policy has proven to be clearly catastrophic.
Those who manage protected areas must learn to leave their territories, and engage in discussion with all the parties around them in order to prevent decisions being made against them.
Thank you, Paul.
It's a subject which, clearly, we could talk about for hours during this MOOC, but we've arrived at the end of this part of the course.
We need to wrap it up.
We'll meet again in the next section, to speak about transboundary protected areas, yet another level of planning.
See you soon, Paul!
- Good bye!
- Have an brilliant day.
