Hello and welcome to all.
Today's lesson is about the Aichi targets as defined by the Convention on Biological
Diversity.
We will go through the history of these targets, then look at the guidelines of one of the targets, and then consider the usefulness of Aichi
Targets.
I invite you to read these thoroughly on the
CBD website, and to look more broadly at their corresponding strategic plan.
Please listen Martin Yelkouni on the history of Aichi targets.
It was during the 10th
Conference of the parties of the Convention on Biological Diversity in Japan, that the Aichi targets, as part of the strategic plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 were adopted.
Aichi refers to the name of the Aichi Prefecture,
Japan.
This is a general strategic framework on biodiversity, not only for biodiversity- related conventions but also for the United Nations as a whole.
The Parties agreed to translate this general international framework into national strategies and action plans for biodiversity.
It seeks to live in harmony with nature looking towards 2050, that by then, biodiversity would be valued, conserved, restored and used wisely, thus maintaining the services provided by the ecosystems which keep the planet healthy, and providing essential benefits to all peoples.
So we are talking about extremely important aspects of conservation overall but also, more specifically in Africa.
And these directly affect our work in protected areas.
You will definitely hear Aichi mentioned in different models.
The 2011-2020 Strategic Plan for Biodiversity is based on 5 main goals, including the 20 Aichi targets for Biological
Diversity.
These are the following:
First goal: Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by mainstreaming biodiversity across government and society.
That means increasing awareness of the value of biodiversity and its integration into developmental planning, resource mobilization for the conservation of biodiversity, and the application of sustainable production and consumption measures.
Targets 1 to 4 are part of this goal.
Second goal:
Reduce the direct pressures exerted on biodiversity and promote sustainable use.
This means reducing the degradation and fragmentation of natural habitats, managing agricultural resources, forestry and aquaculture in a sustainable manner, to reduce pollution and eradicate invasive alien species, and to maintain wetlands inland, coastal and marine.
Targets 5 to 10 are part of that second goal.
3rd goal: Improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, species, and genetic diversity.
This means that well-connected and managed ecologically representative networks and protected areas should cover 1/10th of marine areas and 1/5th of terrestrial areas, avoiding the extinction of species and maintaining genetic diversity of useful domestic species.
This goal covers the targets 11, 12 and 13.
4th goal: Enhance the benefits of biodiversity and ecosystem services.
This means that eventually, ecosystems will provide services essential to man's welfare, improving carbon storage and implementing the Nagoya Protocol. targets 14, 15 and 16 are included in this fourth goal.
5th goal: Enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building.
This means that by 2020, we will have the implementation of national action plans for biodiversity, the integration of traditional knowledge and practices of indigenous and local communities in the conservation of biological diversity, and the improvement of scientific and technological matters.
Targets 17-20 are part of this fifth goal.
The strategic goals are relevant for the creation, governance, and restoration of both protected terrestrial and marine areas.
Of the 20 Aichi objectives, there is one you should be aware of as it directly affects protected areas, and that is the objective 11.
It states that by 2020, at least 17% of terrestrial and inland water, as well as 10% of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services, are conserved through effectively and equitably managed ecologically representative and well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures, and integrated into the wider landscape and seascapes.
A set of guides on the Aichi targets have been developed to provide parties and other stakeholders with an introduction to each of the Aichi
Biodiversity Targets by briefly explaining key terms, highlighting the implications for the establishment of national targets, by providing ideas for preliminary national actions, by identifying progress indicators and identifying additional resources.
These guides are important to consider, if you need to work on Aichi Targets, do not miss them.
Take for example a directive for target 5 of the Aichi Targets pertaining to biodiversity.
Example directive on Goal 5 of the Aichi targets.
Target 5: By 2020, the rate of loss of all natural habitats, including forests, is at least halved and where feasible, brought close to zero, and the degradation and fragmentation is significantly reduced.
The guide will help us understand this article by putting it in context:
Habitat loss, including the degradation and fragmentation is the most important factor in terms of the loss of biodiversity globally.
Similarly, slowing and possibly halting the impoverishment of habitats is essential for the protection of biodiversity and maintaining ecosystems essential to human wellbeing.
Then the guide explains the target:
It applies to every natural habitat including forests.
Finally, the guide suggests ways to achieve this target.
For example, the rate of loss of natural habitats must be reduced by at least half and brought to near zero if possible.
Another example:
The degradation and fragmentation of natural habitats should be significantly reduced.
Please follow the usefulness of Aichi Targets with Abdou Salam Kane.
The Aichi targets were developed, based on an analysis of the benefits that nature provides in terms of human welfare, so they go beyond the mere conservation of biological diversity.
The Aichi targets highlight the connectivity between biodiversity and sustainable development.
The strategic plan of the Aichi objectives are the essential instruments which have been negotiated and adopted by
193 Contracting Parties which gives them a strong legitimacy.
They are an excellent basis for the objectives of sustainable development.
Other arrangements and agencies part of the the United Nations system endorsed the Strategic Plan and its objectives, so as to ensure consistency among these instruments.
So the inclusion of the Aichi targets in the sustainable development goals ensure essential international policy coherence so as to facilitate the implementation and attainment of different multilateral environmental agreements.
The strategic plans of the Aichi targets are being implemented through strategies and national action plans for the conservation of biodiversity.
Some countries have therefore already included, or are in the process of including these obligations in their national planning system across government departments and sectors which are the developmental bases in their country.
These provide institutional infrastructure and resources to implement these elements and then make the expected results for achieving the objectives of sustainable development.
The strategic plan and Aichi targets are currently being implemented through strategies and national plans for biodiversity.
Some countries have therefore already included, or are including these obligations in their national systems, in various ministries and sectors thus providing the institutional infrastructure and resources to implement these elements and to report on them.
In conclusion, significant progress has been made in the achievement of most of the Aichi Biodiversity
Targets.
Some elements of the targets, such as protecting at least 17% of terrestrial and inland water are well underway.
However, in most cases, these advances are not enough to achieve the targets set for 2020.
Additional measures are necessary to keep the 2011-2020 strategic plan for biodiversity on track.
The main measures recommended to achieve each goal are presented in the 4th edition of the Aichi Targets Passport on biodiversity.
Here, the class comes to an end.
The next episode will be the module's conclusion in the form of a short animation, and will present this module homework.
In the meantime, have an excellent day.
