Hello, and welcome to this second chapter of the fluid mechanics course.
This chapter will deal with the notion of surface tension and capillarity phenomena.
It will be organized in 5 submodules.  
Firstly, the first module in which we will define the notion of surface tension as both as an energy per unit of area but also as a force per unit of length.
Then, in a second sub-module in which we will introduce Laplace's law which links the pressure differential to the bounds of a curved interface.
Next, we will introduce the notion of wetting which is the spreading phenomenon of a liquid on a solid support.
Will then come a fourth module in which we will introduce a length, very important, which is the capillarity length which is derived from the competition between the effect of surface tension and the effect of gravity. Finally will come the Marangoni effects in the fifth module, which are the effects related to the variation of surface tension in space, thus to gradients of surface tension causing movements in the fluid. Before getting to the heart of the subject and beginning the first module, here's a little quiz to warm up.
In this quiz, we will seek to determine what is the shape of a rain drop falling from the sky.
A rain drop is characterized by its velocity that I will let you estimate, but also by its size which can be millimeters or maybe at the maximum centimeters.
When this rain drop falls, the question we ask ourselves is what shape does it take.
In a classical representation where the gravity is pointed downwards, vertically,
I give you three proposals: the first one is that the drop takes a shape profiled backwards, it is thus aerodynamically profiled by deforming itself with a pointed tail.
Second proposal, the drop stays isotropic with a symmetric shape (i.e. spherical).
Third proposal, it develops a point forward, so as to penetrate better in the air.
It will only be in module 4 that we will introduce the concepts necessary to answer this question, but I think it is important that you develop your intuition to try to answer at this first quiz.
Let's get to the heart of the heart of the subject and let's consider two immiscible fluids, a light grey fluid and a dark grey fluid, or more mundanely maybe water and oil in contact along a curved interface.
So let's considers here two liquids,
I recall that liquids are condensed phases in which the molecules, although disorganized,  are very dense, the density is very high, which means that the reason why we left the gas state towards a liquid state comes from the fact that the molecules have attractive forces. Therefore, the phase is condensed.
Due to cohesive forces in the fluid it is clear that the molecules which stay immersed in their own fluid, which is the case represented, here, to the left, these molecules have interactions all attractive around them and thus feel relatively happy. Conversely, the molecule that is located at the interface will simply have half of the attractive interactions with the surrounding molecules and another half of unknown interactions with the dark grey fluid surrounding it. If two fluids are not miscible it is clear that these two fluids
"do not like each other".
Each fluid prefers not to be in contact with the surrounding fluid which means in other words that the attractive interactions between both fluids, of a molecule of fluid 1 with a molecule of a fluid 2 are weaker than the attractive interactions within each fluid. In thermodynamic terms, this means that the free energy of both fluids in contact is greater than the free energy of the fluids taken separately.
For that we have to do a thought experiment and isolate the part of the light grey fluid in an environment of the same fluid and the dark grey part in an environment of dark grey fluid. If we do this experiment, it is clear that the molecules located at the interface are now surrounded of molecules of the same type so of molecules with which they have attractive and cohesive forces.
Thus, the freed energy is lower than the free energy of the fluids in contact.
It follows that the creation of interfaces between two immiscible fluids has an energetic cost.
This energetic cost is proportional to the surface of the interface between the two fluids.
The constant of proportionality is what we call interfacial tension, also sometimes called surface tension, often denoted gamma, sometimes sigma, but what is the most important, is what it measures, as it is an energy per unit area, in joule per m^2.
Here is the definition of surface tension. 
From then on it is clear that when the bubbles or the spherical droplets are formed these will try to adopt a spherical shape because they want to get a minimal free energy and so a minimal interface for a given volume.
When I say here: "It is clear", it is likely that this notion is intuitive and that we are all considering that amongst all possible shape, the shape which has the minimum area for a given volume is of course the sphere.
This is more delicate to prove and to prove it, we will use the isoperimetric inequality stated in 3 dimensions stipulates that 36*pi*V^2, for any object is smaller than its surface area^3. 
Let's try to apply this theorem to the case of a sphere.
The volume is equal to
(4/3)*pi*R^3, whereas the surface is equal to 4*pi*R^2. if I replace the 36*pi*V^2 by its expression, we obtain
36 that I decompose by
9*4*pi*16/9 they are the squares of 4/3 pi^2 gives in total pi^3 and R^6.
On the other hand if I take S^3, I obtain the surface^3 expressed
16*4*pi^3*r^6
You see that the 9 are gone and that we have here a strict identity between the two terms of the isoperimetric inequality.
It appears that the sphere is a shape that saturates this inequality, indeed, the sphere is, we can prove it, the minimum surface for a given volume.
We will in fact encounter quite often the notion of minimum surface when we will consider soap films.
Thus, the soap film, when it is forced to press against rigid contours, for example on two metallic circles adopt a shape that minimizes its surface while pressing against the prescribed countours.
This shape is called a catenoid, it is in fact a sort of small chain with a revolution symmetry.
We quickly see that this catenoid has the minimum surface. We already see that it has an exposed surface between the soap film and the air which is lower than the one of a flat cylinder but to demonstrate that it is minimum, it is not obvious.
In fact, it is interesting to note that the soap films realize these minimum shape there where the mathematicians suffer greatly to write the equations that describe these shapes.
Depending on the contours on which will be pressed the soap films, we will obtain all kinds of minimum surfaces, catenoids helicoids but also a huge diversity of shape.
We will come back on this catenoid a little later in the course.
To understand the link between this notion of surface tension as surface energy and the fact that we call it a tension, the word tension points to a force.
We will realize the experiment of the bar.
A bar is situated in equilibrium held to the left and to the right by two plane soap films. The bar is free of rolling along the frame on which it is laying. We will then burst one of the two sides of the soap film.
If the left part is burst we see that the equilibrium is broken the surface tension is now exerted only on the right of the bar which starting to move, pulled by the soap film.
How to model this experiment?
We will try to determine the force that must be applied to keep a bar in equilibrium when this later is subjected on the other side to a soap film. To do so, we will do an energetic reasoning.
The first step is very natural, we must calculate the work of the force when the bar reaches a new position at distance x.
This work is expressed very naturally, it is simply the product of the force multiplied by the distance on which this force has worked i.e. x.
Now we will try to determine the variation of surface energy.
This surface energy has decreased because the interface has decreased of a quantity that is x*L
It is the part that I have here hatched which was suppressed of the interface. This the gain of surface energy is x*L*2 because the film has an upper part and a lower part, multiplied by γ now I am asking this work force to be equal to the surface energy gain by energy conservation.
It appears that the force is equal to 2*L*γ (γ: surface tension) and here, it appears very clearly that the surface tension is a force per unit length. i.e. Newtons per meter.
You are going to tell me :
"How can surface tension be simultaneously an energy per area unit and a force per length unit ?" Well, no problem, in fact these two units are totally equivalent
In order to finish this chapter, we will consider one last experiment where surface tension appears in the same time as a tension force and also as an energy in area units.
Here is this experiment, we are forming a small closed loop in a soap film.
This loop of string is initially closed then we are going to burst the film in the inside of the very delicate loop.
What is going to happen?
The external soap film will pull on the string, in a way to minimize the surface exposed by the soap film and thus form a very open loop until the film breaks off because this film is draining because of the cavity, the soap is flowing along the film. This in this experiment of the burst of a soap film, we have seen that the soap film is looking to minimize its surface, which is possible thanks to the force of surface tension and that the loop is stretched at its maximum and adopts a shape approximatively circular.
