Hello and welcome to this third module of the second chapter of the course on fluid mechanics, this second chapter deals with phenomena of surface tension and capillarity and in this third module we will more precisely deal with wetting phenomena when we bring together a liquid and a solid substrate and we will in particular demonstrate a very important law that is Young's relation.
In order to develop a certain intuition of what can happen, it is natural to compare the surface energy of a dry solid, so in presence of a vapor or of a gas and a wet solid in which we have brought together : the liquid, the gas and the solid. We see in this situation that there are three states in play : the solid, the liquid and the vapor, this is what is going to make the problem delicate. It is natural to be convinced that, depending on the affinity of the solid with the vapor or with the liquid, we can be either in the left situation, i.e. that the liquid is not wetting the solid, or in the right situation, i.e. the liquid completely wets the solid. The everyday experiment shows us that the solution the most commonly observed is neither the one on the left, nor the one on the right, but an intermediate solution in which droplets are formed, the question that we will try to ask ourselves, is to try to determine what characterizes the size and the shape of these droplets and how this is linked to the different properties physical and chemical of the present phases ? Indeed, in such circumstances, there are three surface tension that can come into play : on one hand the surface tension between the solid and the vapor, on another between the solid and the liquid, and on another between the liquid and the vapor. It is very natural to introduce a parameter that we call spreading parameter that compares the non-wet situation : the solid is only in the presence of vapor γSV to a solid completely wet that has two interfaces : an interface solid-liquid and an interface liquid-vapor.
Depending on this parameter we will see that the geometrical properties of the droplet deposited on a substrate will depend on this parameter. We take a thin strip on which we deposit thanks to a pipette a small droplet, we see that the water is spreading and forming a drop relatively flat. We can say that the glass is a hydrophilic substrate, that likes water. If we had deposit an oil droplet, the oil would have even more spread. Now we clean the thin strip and we pass it in the flame of a candle, which allows to deposit sweat. We see that when we deposit the small droplet, this time, the liquid refuses to spread and forms a drop nearly spherical, the phenomenon of unpearling occurs. How to quantify these observations ? We will introduce a macroscopic parameter, the wetting angle that is the angle that is made by a droplet of really small size on a solid substrate in the presence of vapor, that we denote θ and this angle of wetting depends only on the properties chemical and physical of the three present phases, i.e. : the solid, the liquid and the vapor. How to precisely link this macroscopic and observable parameter to the physical quantities that are the three inter-facial tensions introduced previously
? We will, as often, proceed by a reasoning in energy. We will make the following thought experiment : let's imagine firstly that the liquid wets with an angle θ a solid in presence of a vapor.
Then, let's suppose that the triple line carries out a movement dx, we will count which are the interfaces created and the interfaces deleted by such an operation. First of all, we see that an interface of length dx has been created between the liquid and the solid although it was previously occupied by an interface between the solid and the vapor.
We have thus suppressed the surface energy
- γSV dx, but moreover, we have also created a small interface here between the vapor and the liquid. This interface has the size cosine θ dx. Hence, we have thus the variation of energy as a function of the distance traveled by the contact line, when the droplet is at equilibrium, the surface energy must be minimum. Which means that whatever the small movement it can travel, the derivative at equilibrium of the energy with respect of this small movement must be equal to 0, which imposes an expression for cosine θ which is simply cosine θ is equal to γSV - γSL, I have passed the two terms on the other side, divided by γLV. This is Young's relation.
Now, how to link this expression of cosine θ to the spreading parameter S?
We will simply superimpose on this next slide, Young's relation and the definition of the spreading parameter. By small algebraic calculations extremely simple, we see that cosine θ, by making S appear, is equal to S + γLV/γLV. In other words, cosine
θ = 1+S / γLV. Armed with this expression, we will now, and remembering most of all that cosine θ, by definition is always ranged between -1 and 1, we will be able to, in the plane, make the parameter S vary from a positive value to a negative value and deduce the values of θ that correspond. We see that naturally in the region where S is positive, cosine
θ cannot be defined because cosine θ cannot be greater than 1 and so we are in presence of a total wetting.
This is quite normal given the definition of the spreading parameter
S of which we understand that if it is positive, it is favorable for the solid to decorate itself of liquid. However, once S becomes negative, it is possible to form a small droplet and θ will progressively take values close to 0 until values close to Pi. We are in a situation of partial wetting, with a spreading very favorable when S is close to 0 and a wetting which is very partial with a solid that does not like the liquid in the situation where S is much more negative. Whenever
S becomes really negative, we have a phenomenon that we can qualify as non-wetting or of wetting null, where, the droplet finally cannot wet the interface. We thus see that the situations of total wetting, of wetting null or of partial wetting are easily resulted in terms of spreading parameter or wetting angle.
In order to complete this third module, we will try to re-derivate Young's relation by a small calculation of force. To do so, we will consider the triple line, here, and we will look at the forces that are applied on this triple line. We have on one hand the surface tension, I recall that we can associate to the surface energy a surface tension. We thus have the surface tension between the liquid and the vapor (liquid-vapor) that is pulling in the direction of the interface of the droplet, then we have the surface tension between the solid and the liquid that is always pulling in the direction of the interface between the solid and the liquid and the surface tension γS between the solid and the vapor that is pulling in the direction of the interface between the solid and the vapor. We will project these three forces in the horinzontal direction Ox, we thus find -γSV +
γSL + γLV * cos θ, hence, with the fundamental law of dynamics, when the droplet is at equilibrium, cos θ is simply equal to (γSV - γSL) / γLV, we find again 
Young's relation.
