Hello and welcome to this fifth module of the second chapter of the course on fluid mechanics. Second chapter that deals with the effect of surface tension or interfacial tension. In this fifth module we will especially be interested in the phenomena that occur when the value of the tension of the constant of surface tension is inhomogeneous in space
: Meaning that it is not the same in different points of the interface between two immiscible fluids, in this case, we will see that flows are created that we call Marangoni flows.
We speak in a more general way of the Marangoni effect. These inhomogeneities of the surface tension can have two origins. On one hand an origin linked to the value of the temperature. On the other an origin linked to the presence of small molecules that we call surfactants and that are snuggled at the interface between the two fluids immiscible and that change the physic-chemical properties of the interface and thus the value of the inter-facial tension.
Today we will describe several experiments. We will begin right now with a first experiment that is the following : let's consider a beaker filled with water to the surface of which we deposit little dusts that float at the surface. We then approach a burning soldering iron and we observe what happens.
We see that the small dusts tend to diverge, this divergent motion being centered on the hot point. If we look a little closer by moving the soldering iron, we see the phenomenon from a little closer with here, a radial motion, divergent from the warmest point. How to explain this phenomenon ? What is at the origin of this divergent radial motion ? In order to analyze it, we need to know the dependency of the constant of surface tension as a function of temperature, and for the majority of the fluid pairs, I recall that in fact, the surface tension is always defined for fluid pairs, here it is for water and air, most of the time, the surface tension is a decreasing function of the temperature. Here, we have measurements in the laboratory, these are measurements quite delicate to realize technically, of the surface tension between water and oil, as a function of temperature. We see that, if we increase the temperature of about twenty degrees to a hundred degrees, the surface tension is more or less divided by 2, these are thus very significant effects.
Now we know that, in a general manner, for a big majority of fluid pairs the surface tension decreases with temperature. We can understance the experiment. The soldering iron is here represented schematically in blue, locally the temperature is greater, and I just told you that when the temperature is greater, the surface tension meanwhile is smaller.
Naturally, this hot point diffuses slowly in the beaker but far from the hot point, the temperature remains at the ambient temperature that I note T0 and so the surface tension remains at its ambient value γ0. γ0, as
I have indicated is greater than γ-, thus, along the interface, we will have a traction force of the surface tensions that are the weakest towards the strongest surface tensions and so from the hot point towards the cold points, towards the cold edges of this beaker. This will create recirculation zones, the fluid will be put into motion along the interface and will be put into motion inside the beaker like it has been represented here, by these streamlines. Here is the explanation of the phenomenon that we have seen. We can also consider that what is happening when we cool down locally the interface. It is still a Marangoni effect. Here we add a metallic ball that has been widely cooled down and we visualize simultaneously the flow and in the same time the temperature field thanks to a thermal camera, an infrared camera that deduces the temperature. What do we see? We see that when we add, it is not really an ice cube but a frozen ball, locally the surface tension increases and it induces a converging motion. Even though the visualization is not spectacular, it is quite possible to see the converging motion towards the cold point. Unlike what is happening when we had heated with the soldering iron, we had a diverging motion from the hot point. Another way to make the surface tension vary, as I had said in the introduction, is to add what we call tension-active molecules or sometimes, by an Anglicism, surfactants. In this cases here, these surfactants, that have a hydrophilic head, i.e. that like water, but however a lyophilic tail , i.e. that like lipids, these surfactants will snuggle at the interface and will leave this interface less deformable, less mobile and will in particular, also, reduce the inter-facial tension and it is actually the reason why we add soap or dish-washing liquid when we want to form bubbles. Indeed, as the surface tension is lower, the pressure difference at the edges of the bubble of which we have seen is proportional, on one hand, to the total curvature but also to the surface tension. The overpressure required to form the bubble is smaller in presence of soap than in absence of soap. Hence, if we want to form soap bubbles, we need to add surfactants to decrease the surface tension. This decrease of the surface tension can be extremely drastic when we use soaps of good quality, which allows to create huge bubbles. Now that we have understood that locally the surface tension decreases thanks to the presence of tension-active molecules, we can redo the previous experiment that consists in taking a beaker, to seed it with small dusts but this time we will not approach a soldering iron but we will simply bring through a pipette a small drop of dish-washing liquid. And look at an extremely spectacular effect of diverging flow from the point where we have added the surfactants.
The sketch is thus exactly identical, the surfactants, here represented by a small drop of dish-washing liquid locally decreases, and this in a way extremely sensible, the surface tension. A flow is created which is a radial diverging flow and which creates in consequence here in a cross-sectional view, a movement of recirculation also inside the beaker. Now, we can use this Marangoni effect that we call solution-capillary as it comes from the presence of molecules in a solution, we can indeed use this Marangoni effect to create a system of Marangoni propulsion. Let's imagine a small raft that is floating here, at the surface of the beaker, this one is in equilibrium between the left and the right, let's not forget that it is a section so this one is in radial equilibrium, i.e. the forces of surface tension that are pulling on this raft are balanced out one by one in all radial directions of this raft, or here, between the left and the right. We will add, in an asymmetric way, a little bit of soap. What is happening ? Locally the surface tension is reduced, and you already see that the capillary traction on the right of the raft is greater than the capillary traction on the left, so that the raft will move towards the right.
It is indeed what we can observe on the following film. The raft is here, initially at equilibrium, it is stabilized. We add the droplet of surfactant, the droplet of dish-washing liquid in this case. See how fast this propulsion phenomenon is efficient.
It is now time for me to resume what we have seen in this second chapter of fluid mechanics, second chapter that dealt with phenomena of surface tension, i.e. phenomena that occur when we put in contact two immiscible fluids. We have successively during the first module, introduced the notion of surface tension, we have interpreted it either as an energy per unit area, it is the formula that is here represented on the slide, but we have also interpreted it as a force of tension.
Maybe if you want to remember an experiment very representative of this notion of tension, think simply of the experiment of the bar where a small bar free to roll on a frame and held in equilibrium by two strings of soap that hold it symmetrically and when we break one of the two strings, the equilibrium is broken and the bar starts rolling in the direction of the string that is pulling on it so there is a phenomenon of surface tension. In the second module we have defined, demonstrated and used
Laplace's law, Laplace's law is the law that determines the pressure difference at the boundaries of a curved interface and when the interface is curved, the pressure difference is simply equal to γ (coefficient of surface tension), multiplied by the total curvature. Here again, if you want to remember a striking experiment, simply think of this experiment where two bubbles are connected, a small one and a big one, and where we observe that the small one is emptied in the big one simply because the over-pressure inside the small bubble is greater than the over-pressure inside the big bubble. Then, we have in the third module, talked about wetting. Wetting are the phenomena that occur when we put into contact a liquid on a solid substrate in the presence of a gaseous phase. In this case, a droplet is generally formed and this droplet has a contact angle θ that is defined by
Young's relation here represented. You do not need to know this formula by heart, however it is quite useful to simply remember that this angle is a property associated to the chemical properties of these 3 phases, i.e. the surface tension between the solid and the vapor, the surface tension between the solid and the liquid and the surface tension between the liquid and the vapor. We have then approached the competition between the surface tension that is trying to keep the interfaces the more spherical as possible and the gravity that is trying to minimize the potential energy of gravity and we have in particular introduced a characteristic length very important which is the capillary length and showed the role of this capillary length in 
Jurin's law which is the rise of a small column of liquid in a capillary tube.
Today, in this fifth module, we have discussed of the Marangoni effect, these are the flows that occur when the surface tension is not a constant but when it depends on space. The reason for which this surface tension will depend on space can be linked to inhomogeneities in temperature or to the presence of non-homogeneous matter of soap type molecules that we call surfactants. Hence is concluded the second chapter of the course on fluid mechanics.
