The ecological characteristics of animal species to monitor influence the ecological monitoring.
In particular, regarding the choice of key ecological attributes, the surveying methods, or monitoring plans to implement.
As we have already seen, monitoring key ecological attributes show the conditions of the monitored species.
There are 3 types of attributes.
The size and distribution of the species.
Its composition and population dynamics.
And the quality of its habitat.
Obviously, it is not about monitoring all of these parameters, but to choose the ones that will give the best information on the species' condition and at the lowest cost.
The choice depends essentially on the ecology of the species.
The chosen ecological attributes should also reflect the abnormal modification of the population, so that quick reaction can be put in place if needed.
The ecological attributes' size of the population can vary abnormally.
For instance, for example, it can decrease due to poaching, which would require an intervention.
But it can also vary due to some natural phenomenon.
Elephants, for instance, tend to travel seasonally far beyond the limits of the protected area to find food.
During the dry season you will find them around the pond looking for water.
And during the rainy season, where there is plenty of water, they can spread over vast areas.
For this reason the number of elephants in the protected area can fluctuate, but it doesn't necessarily mean the population is in bad condition.
The distribution of the species on the other hand, depends on the quality of the suitable habitat within the protected area.
But also on the species' tolerance of other species or potential risks.
For instance, if the distribution map of a park shows that concentration of a species is in areas that are far from the park's boundaries, once grazing is possible everywhere, it could show that there is a poaching threat coming from the surrounding areas.
The  distribution of the animal species is therefore is a good indicator for the condition of the species in the park and of the location of possible threats.
The second type of ecological attribute is a structure of animal population.
It is characterized normally by the size of the groups, or the numbers of families it consists of.
The size depends on the social system of the species in question.
For example, zebra herds gather several families.
The size of the group depends on the difficulty to find water and food in the considered area.
The more food there is, the larger the group will be. 
And if the conditions of the habitat gets bad the group splits up to form smaller units.
Thus, monitoring looks at the size of groups and detects if the population suffers, let's say, and has to adapt to difficult conditions.
Some species form large flocks, like the buffalos, while others stick to family units with few individuals like the [INAUDIBLE], for instance.
So you need to have a rather good knowledge of the normal social structure of the different species to detect any form of anomaly during the monitoring.
Finally, the third type of ecological attribute to take into account is the species' habitat.
Indeed, to survive, animals need the suitable habitat one in which they can get food and water, obviously, and also find the right conditions for their reproduction.
Species can be dependent on a particular habitat, like some water birds, for instance, are dependent on permanent wetlands within the park.
So monitoring the quality of this habitat, the wetlands in this case, and especially the evolution of invasive plants that may invade those ponds is key to the monitoring of the survival of those species within the protected area.
You need to know the ecological characteristics of the monitored species to be able to identify what key ecological attribute would be the most relevant to monitor in order to differentiate natural variation of its population's condition
 from abnormal ones
 within the territory.
