We've seen that ecological characteristics of animal species influence the choice of key ecological attributes that will define the species' condition.
But ecological specificity also play a part in choosing the surveying method and the sampling plan to implement.
The type of habitat is key in choosing the surveying method to apply to the field.
If the species are difficult to spot because they live in an area with dense vegetation, indirect methods proving the presence of the species and giving an idea of the number, by following the droppings, nests, the tracks, etc., should be used.
For instance, small antelopes lives in forests and the (INAUDIBLE).
It is therefore, quite difficult to spot them.
But they are territorial, and mark their territory by visible droppings.
In this case, these elements are the ones that should be monitored. 
On the other hand, larger species living in open spaces can be subject to direct ground-based or aerial surveying.
So now, what about sampling and the ecological factors that may or will guide it?
In this case, the area over which a species is distributed or it's daily and seasonal travel region influence the method to use and the way it should be implemented.
Thereby, species distributed over smaller area will undergo closer monitoring of it's overall population compared to species covering more ground.
In this case, the species will be monitored by a random sampling process in the entire park.
Obviously, if you want to assess a change of population a smaller bit maybe, more samples need to be collected in order to be able to detect this change.
Also if a species move over different habitats, it's not a bad idea to consider the proceeding to stratified sampling where each stratum is represented by one of the possible habitats used by the species.
Ecological factors also influence the time when surveying should take place.
To maximize the possibilities to observe the monitored species, the surveying, the monitoring needs to take place at a time of year or of the day when it is most active and easiest to observe, of course.
For instance, wild beasts leave
Serengeti in Tanzania to enjoy the greener pastures of the Maasai Mara in Kenya. when it already raining there.
So, the managers of the Serengeti
National Park and the Maasai Mara Reserve, will proceed to do monitoring of these wild beasts at different times in the year, according to this animal rhythm.
Yes.
So finally, there are also ecological factors that influence the frequency of data collection.
The more the considered species is likely to adapt rapidly to new constraints, like changing territory to escape threat, for instance, the more you will need to increase the frequency of surveying in order to be able to detect this change on time, and take then the right management actions.
Conversely, for instance, to monitor a normal increase of the elephant population, it is useless to proceed to early counts as natural growth is around 5 to 6 percent.
In this case it is better to go
4 or 5, or 10 years surveying frequency, which will allow to follow the population at lowest cost.
In short, the concept of ecology to master in order to design an ecological monitoring plan of a given species that will make surveying easier, are to know, first, the suitable habitat of the species.
It's social system, to determine the composition of the groups, and their seasonal variations.
The frequency and the way daily and seasonal travels occurs.
The normal growth rate of it's population.
It's tolerance to the threats, such as poaching, competition with other species, either world or domestic.
Also human presence, change of habitat and other kind of threats.
And the type of visible markers that indicate it's presence, like nests, we saw that for chimps. droppings, tracks, broken trees, if we are talking of elephants.
