Abiotic factors are lifeless elements of an environment.
They include physio-chemical factors and in this case they are climatic including rainfall, temperature, humidity, winds, light, or edaphic which is size, texture, structure, or PH and also hydrological which includes water physio-chemical properties.
Flows, siltations, levels, et cetera. 
Elements that impact the environment's living being.
Abiotic factors are therefore, potentially key ecological attributes accessing the health condition of certain habitats. 
For instance, general climatic factors especially those related to rainfall, to winds, to temperature and to relative humidity highly influenced plants phenology which is for instance period of flowering, or period of fruiting, and  also leaves renewal. 
They also influence fruiting and seedling germinations.
Monitoring these factors consists in implementing an observation system on the field that involves  a synchronic observation approach, as well as diachronic observation approach. 
The synchronic observation approach means comparing state of the environment to a defined, at a defined moment, within and between territories. 
Meanwhile diachronic observation approach means a comparison of environments overtime. 
In practice, the heterogeneity of the ecosystem usually requires a representative sampling approach thus, one should start by considering some of the following questions: what does, are variables and indicators for change that I should monitor?
Another question to ask is what is the minimum amount of data needed to detect such a change, or how to account for data collection process.
You may ask more or many other questions. 
Then, depending of the factors, three line of approach in monitoring abiotic factors can be identified. 
For case one, consist in whether monitoring that account for climatic factors. 
For case two, accounts for hydrological monitoring that accounts for  hydrological factors. 
And for case three, consist in pedological monitoring that accounts for edaphic factors. 
Whether the monitoring focuses on measurements of some variables, including rainfall, daily temperature, and for measurement of daily temperature, one will need to measure the maximum temperature and the minimum temperature. 
You will also need to measure air humidity, which is the hygrometric contents of the air, and also, the wind strength and the light. 
In fact, indices of rainfall, temperature, winds strength and light intensity are monitoring indicators that ought to be tested
 and validated.
Climatic data measurements should be carried out daily and always take place at the same time of the day or night. 
In general, meteorologists have chosen midnight, six am, noon and 6 pm GMT.
Within  a protected area, hydrological monitoring essentially targets surface water.
This focus of ecological monitoring is particularly useful when it comes to managing place in arid and semi arid regions where water is a limiting factor. 
The most important viable in hydrological monitoring are the quantity of water in stock.
You will measuring floods, base floor, evaporations infiltrations, et cetera, of water bodies.
You also have to measure water quality which is physio-chemical component of water.
You have to measure water floors and water bodies siltations.
Water levels, temperature, PH, oxygen, conductivity, turbidity, height of solid deposits, and flow velocity, which is rate of flows entering and leaving the pounds are protected areas water body indicators that  have to be tested and approved for comparison sync later on. 
The periodicity of hydrological measurements is usually seasonal, but monthly controls of water levels should be considered in dry and semi-arid zones which are example, 
Savannahs especially in dry seasons. 
The data collected helps to elaborate weekly hydrological reports in periods of flooding and monthly ones, in low water periods. 
Under natural conditions, the soil which
is edaphic components does not vary significantly in one place from one season to another. 
Soil monitoring especially will target typological variables which is type of soils and the degradation of the other soils by factors including desertification, erosion, pollutions, et cetera. 
In practice, pedological monitoring also consider the land use systems of your sites. 
Above all, indicators consider the ratio of lands affected by a phenomenon including desertification, pollution, soil salinity, et cetera.
The data are collected through pedological studies including observation of the field, physio-chemical analysis, description of soil profiles, et cetera, and also, through socio-economic studies and remote detections including cartographies, et cetera. 
The periodicity of data collection for pedological data monitoring by process depends on the problematic synchronic and diachronic data collected or all these series of data should at the end help validating indicators of change. 
The idea is to proceed to comparative analysis between indicators to understand the shifting trends that would be observed especially related to living beings in the ecosystems. 
