Monitoring plants that are considered as protected area values if often key to understanding the ecosystem and making the right decision especially when it comes to ensuring a sustainable development of certain woody plants. 
If the goal is to monitor long-term changes of plants biodiversity in different ecosystem, it is key to use samples in permanently marked-off areas.
The intensity ecological factors can change based on geological or topographic gradients which then causes changes in the structure and in the floristic composition along these gradients. 
Regarding the monitoring of plants communities that do not have strong gradients, it is recommended to use permanent plots, but when the gradients are strong, it is better to use permanent transects. 
We won't be developing these specifications here as this unit focuses on monitoring trees of a forest canopy in stands where there are no strong gradients. 
Monitoring trees of a permanent forest plots in the long run, provides important information on the forest structure and composition, on it's condition, the growth pace and longevity of trees species inside the forest, on the progressive variation of a species' composition and the size of the population, on the impacts environmental changes have on the mature trees, et cetera. 
This continuous form of monitoring, help to assess the impacts of the decisions affecting forest vegetation. 
In this case, permanent plots can ground-truth the measurements obtained via satellite images.  
Square shaped plots are generally the norm. 
In the case of forest ecosystems, two sizes of square-shaped plots are recommended,
100 by 100 meters, one hectare or 2.5 acres and 20 by 20 meter plots. 
These two formats are interchangeable or can be used together.
Ideally, you should be able to use at least two plots of 2.5 acres per selected type of forest or stand and whatever the stand, use at least 5 independent quadrants of 20 by 20 meters. 
Plotting the species accumulation curve determines if this number is sufficient for the given forest stand. 
To avoid bias, the plots should be scattered randomly throughout the chosen stands.
Likewise, the location of the plot in each settlement should be set at random. 
Some basic principles ought to be followed. 
A, the equivalent 3 times edge of the forest covers should separate the plot from the edge of a non-forest stand to prevent an edge effect.
B, plots of 2.5 acres should be separated by at least 250 meters and 20 by 20 meter quadrats by at least 50 meters. 
See, in small or un-even forest stands where the previously stated conditions can not be respected, only independent 
20 by  20 meter quadrats and not 1 hector plots should be established. 
D, avoid establishing plots where there are strong and an unusual plant variations or in the presence of important ecological disruptions such as a small lake, a field or a river, and E, avoid places where roads or paths run for the plots unless the study is about the impact the use of such paths. 
In this case, the decisions should be justified. 
It is vital to collect and take note on the following data.
The tag number and species of all standing trees with a diameter at breast height, 
DBH, equal to or higher than 10 centimeters, 
4 centimeter, or higher, when forest growth is poor.
Two, the location all numbered trees of course, located on a map. 
The DBH of all numbered trees, the DBH measurements following strict rules as just showed on this diagram. 
The general state of all numbered trees.
The following data should also be collected and recorded. 
The height of all numbered trees, the height of the lowest leaving branch of all numbered trees. 
The canopy age, photos taken from given places at set times and dates. 
The degree of canopy closure per quadrat. 
The forest stand should be assessed every five years or whenever needed. 
If the quadrats suffer from terrible weather conditions, fires or other catastrophic events, the quadrats should be measured again, and the new information should recorded as soon as possible after the catastrophe when the conditions  have improved.
To analyze the data, draw up list of standing species found for all selected trees, take notes of all the species found in the plots or in the permanent quadrats. 
For each species of living trees only, calculate separately the abundance, the basal area, the density and the dominance, the frequency, the relative density, the relative dominance, the relative frequency and the value of importance.
Calculate the total basal surface of all standing dead trees and the ones leaning. 
If carried out well on the representative samples of a studied stand,
monitoring plants will help, making the right management decisions be there in terms of forest conversation or of it's sustainable use when compatible with the protected area's
 conservation targets.
