Direct mammal monitoring relies on the study of the state and the evolution of animal populations, as well as the influence of pressures on said population through direct observation of individuals or group of animals. 
In practice, it consists in monitoring the trends of certain key ecological attributes of this population.
The most common ones are density, distribution, or shifting trends of this population, as well as in direction it can have with its habitat.
The choice of the assessment methods of these parameters is key to direct animal population monitoring.
The type of method chosen depends on simple questions.
Such as,
"Which ecological attribute should I monitor?"
"Which indicators should I follow for each of these ecological attributes?"
Et cetera.
We can take the example of ecological attributes related to the population size, average density, group sizes, distribution per habitat. 
We can also at attributes describing the structure and the population dynamics, gender, or age ratio, data related to health conditions, for instance.
But it is also important to see what the minimum data needed to monitor the population is.
This will help define the collection cycle, or periodicity, as well as its duration.
Many inventory techniques can be used, of course.
Among them, as we saw in Unit 2, total count methods can be carried out, as well as methods based on sample.
In the case of total count, the entire study zone is inspected.
And statistical calculation, if any, only concerns the estimation of bias.
Total counting on food, for example, is based on the individual inclination of all animals seen by the observer.
This technique can be applied to a great number of species, such as elephants, giraffes, rhinos, most predators, and some antelopes that are easy to spot.
Most of the time, big species that you can see easily on the field.
As said earlier, sampling should be carried out at random, for the number to be representative of the entire animal population.
In practice, the sample units can take on multiple forms. 
The most commonly used are quadrats and transects.
Quadrats are based on the idea of visually counting
 the number of individuals
inside a predefined plot set at random in the studied zone.
All individuals observed outside this plot are not counted.
The estimation of the population consists in calculating the density of the sample which is the ratio between number of counted individuals, counted animals in the quadrat, and its surface area, and to extend this number to the total surface of the zone, to obtain, of course, an estimate of the global population of the monitored species.
And for inventories by line transect the method consists in searching animals along a line of undetermined width.
The animal's perpendicular distance to this transect line is noted.
And in practice, three measurements are taken per observation. 
These are the radial distance, the viewing angle, and the perpendicular distance.
The transect line can be traveled on foot, on horseback, by car, or by whatever mean you may have.
You could use a bike, of course.
Density estimate is then obtained by a formula that considers the number of observations, the total transect length, the width of the line of the observation strip which is determined, once again, by the distance at which animals are seen, and the detection probability function.
And there are several estimators of this function that are widely documented in the literature.
Distance is a specialized software that can help you to estimate the functions.
Another technique, the capture-recapture technique, is a method often used when data on mobile species need to be collected.
It is a special technique, where a known number of animals of a species is marked and released.
And based on the hypothesis that the population of marked individuals compared to non-marked individuals is the same in the sample as in the entire population.
The share of marked and non-marked animals that will be captured next, will be used to estimate the total number of animals within the population.
There are different capture and recapture methods.
The choice depends on whether you work on closed population, in other words, one that is not in contact with population outside the protected area.
Or you work on open population when protected area individuals migrate outside the protected area.
Quite often, another method is also used very frequently.
The kilometric (abundance) index.
It is based on observations made during walking surveillance, patrols, for instance, corrected depending on [INAUDIBLE].
For instance, the walking time. 
The more you walk, the more you see.
This essentially helps to detect population variations over time.
One technique especially consists in looking for noncturnal animals with rump.
But this method is not suited to sensing species with low or very low density.
The punctual abundance index is a technique consisting in counting animals at a certain fixed point.
Like waterholes, for example.
And to monitor population fluctuation over time.
This technique is usually carried out from a hideout at a set time and duration.
And the measurement should be repeated to have enough data.
Measuring the group size is also a technique that is used sometimes.
And for some herbivores, the group size depends on abundance of species in the environment.
[INAUDIBLE] monitoring of this indicator helped detect fluctuations in species density.
For example, group size of mountain goat tend to increase when the density increases.
Monitoring a sample would then allow to estimate abundance variation, without having to count the entire population
Which indeed is a much simpler way.
In all cases, monitoring techniques require a good capacity to identify species, and to be able to estimate numbers upon very brief, sometimes, visual contacts.
Biological knowledge of the species is also key to predict their behavior in the presence of observers.
Finally, observation conditions should be good.
One should avoid windy, dusty, too hot or rainy conditions.
Observers should move quietly, that's the very least, and consider animal reactivity, especially in areas prone to poaching.
Direct monitoring has the perk of giving information on the conditions of pack animals.
But is not applicable to hard-to-spot or secretive species.
