Hello.
Indirect mammal monitoring methods are used when the animals themselves are difficult to observe.
When vegetation is dense, as it is the case in forests, for example.
When animals are present in low density, or when a species tends to appear scarcely in the open.
Indirect counting approaches are usually based on sampling techniques we already talked about in the indirect monitoring. 
And so (INAUDIBLE) use sampling units, such as the quadrats you are familiar with now.
Of course, line transects can also be used.
They are axis of progression along which the indicators are counted.
Belt transects can also be used.
They are based on the same principle, but the counting is done over determined surface on both sides of the progression axis.
There are several indirect inventory methods depending on the species that is being studied, on the environment's physical characteristics, on indicators that are being measured, and the resources at hand.
What we are looking for in that case, remember, are signs or indicators of the animal's presence. 
And to measure, to monitor large African mammals, the most commonly used methods are as follows.
These are monitoring footprints, monitoring tracks, monitoring dens and burrows, and nests, monitoring faeces, and monitoring family noises or calls, especially when monitoring lions.
Okay, let's see that in detail.
The footprint counting methods can be used when the substrate allows it, and it is a case in sandy regions, for example.
Monitoring footprints can be done daily, at any time you want, but at each passage, do not forget to cover the signs that have already been recorded, of course.
And the analysis of footprints, helps to estimate the walking direction, and the use of the habitat, as well as the size, the gender, and even at times, the age of the individuals. 
An estimation of the population density can then be done by a simple formula, combining the density of the tracks recorded and the average size of the considered species' habitat.
The tracks recognition methods helps in some cases to recognize an animal, and to monitor it.
Recognition can be done by sampling scars, sizes, missing claws, etc.
For example, this technique has been used to monitor leopards in the Namibian desert. 
It can also be used for the individual monitoring of elephants.
Yeah, it's often used for elephants.
The footprints of a species can vary depending on if they are front or back paws, for example.
Depending on the age, the gender of the animal.
It is therefore advised to combine direct observation of the animal and it's tracks.
Ideally, in each region, it is recommended to set a baseline collection using plaster moulds, or 3D photographs.
Yes, and counting burrows and dens, consist in monitoring animal resting or reproductive sites.
It isn't always easy, because the number of individuals in the burrows may vary.
They maybe abandoned or occupied by another species.
For example,  aardvark burrows can be occupied by wart hogs, hyenas, mongooses, etc.
Lots of species.
On the field this method consists in distinguishing the number of abandoned burrows occupied by the studied species, occupied by other species, as well as the number of individuals per occupied burrows.
To clarify this question, it is advised to combine this technique with the identification of tracks at the burrow entrance.
As the faeces monitoring method is commonly used when monitoring elephants, it consists in counting all the dung heaps or dung piles in the sampling area where units are often made or quadrats or again, transects we have talked about.
Yeah.
Each elephant dung is classified in one of the five age categories defined by specialists going from very fresh to almost completely decomposed.
And only relatively fresh dung piles are to be considered in the mathematical estimate of dung densities.
Thereby, droppings that are too decomposed are considered to have disappeared.
There is a relatively simple relation between the elephant density, E, the number of dungs produced by elephant per day,
Y, the dung decomposition rate, or (INAUDIBLE) the dung density, D.
This gives an estimation of the number of elephants present in the zone.
And the nest counting method is very much used when monitoring certain primates.
(INAUDIBLE) will share more about that 
.with you
It consists in counting the nest in the sampling area where the units again, are often quadrats or transects.
There is a relation between the nest density and the average size of the nest groups.
The nest degradation speed, v, and the density or (INAUDIBLE) if you work on (INAUDIBLE), C.
The method using sounds or calls is essentially used when monitoring lions. 
It consists in recording the sound at set point separated by a minimal interval of
13 kilometers, in order not to recount the same animals.
In this way you obtain an estimate of the minimal number of lions on the survey sites.
Finally, you can also use sensors and captors to detect indirectly the animals.
It could be acoustic sensor or camera trap that takes pictures of or make movies as we have already seen.
That way you can follow the animals species of your path without having to be on the ground, especially when your cameras are connected so that you can download the data from your office.
And then you enter the Internet of Things.
