Let's have a look into a special case of carnivores by starting with census for direct observation on linear transects.
Two or three observers run the entire length of the transects day or night. In a closed environment like the forest, these prospections would rather be carried out on foot.
In an open environment they are usually done from a vehicle.
When an animal is spotted
It's perpendicular distance from the transect line is recorded as well as other relevant observations regarding the number of individuals, their gender, their age group, what they are doing, their behaviour, etc.
Well, if the sample size does not give an estimation of the population density, you don't have enough data.
The number of animals identified per kilometre covered at least gives you an ID of the relative abundance
And when the sample size does give an estimation. The density of populations can be estimated thanks to the DISTANCE software, which
Emanuel taught us about earlier.
Of course, you can also carry out a dropping count along the line of progression this is indirect monitoring.
In this case an observer examines the ground looking for droppings.
While the others they focus on the route thanks to a compass, for instance. They'll measure the traveled distance and clear the way.
However, for many carnivore species in the forest, this approach won't give any information and it is better to sense droppings along trails and roads where
 they are more visible.
When a heap of droppings is found measure the width of the strip containing it so that you will be able to use the Distance software.
Also look at its level of decomposition and the type of vegetation around it.
There is a relation between the density of carnivores, especially the big cats, the number of droppings produced
 per cat and per day,
 the dropping decomposition rate and
 the density of these droppings.
Counting the footprints along the transects is also a good idea.
This method simply consists in counting the tracks left by great carnivores along the progression lines. The number of tracks per kilometre covered gives you, once again a kilometric abundance index.
With all species of large carnivores the density of tracks is greatly related to the population density and there are simple calculation methods. Let's take the example of the lion in this formula.
 Xi is the population density
 expressed in number of individuals
per 100 square km. And Ti is the track density expressed in number of tracks per 100 kilometre covered.
Quite simple, for each track, record the GPS point, the distance from the starting position,
the number of individuals, the age of the track, when it is possible to record. Whether this track belongs to an individual from previously recorded tracks, the type of substrate where the track is spotted and so on.
Some precautions need to be taken to avoid counting individuals twice.
For example, respect a distance of at least 500 metres before tracks of an individual of the same species
 can be recorded again.
Eliminate the second observation and the next if identical individual travel over 500 metres in the same direction.
Also, eliminate tracks of the same age and size moving about in opposite directions over short distances.
Photographic recording channels will be done using, for instance, photo traps. In this case the camera should face a trail often used by carnivores. To find the right place look for crossing trails, droppings signs of food, etc. The location should be narrow enough for animals to be obliged to come near the camera.
A network of cameras can be set up through the surveyed zone or at the centre of some sampling you need, in that case, most of the time, a quadrant.
You can also put bait in such a way as to photograph any animal approaching the bait. This is a good solution when the trails are often used by humans or to sample carnivores rarely using the roads and the trails.
Hereby you obtain important information on the presence of species in the zone and this
information may be very important in itself and sometimes on the structure of the populations.
For species that can be identified from the specific trait, such as the shapes on their coats, directly count individuals, describe their traveling patterns and calculate population density from the photos taken by cameras set up in the sampling blocks.
This is, in particular, useful for
 leopards, for instance. 
A special technique is also used to count and monitor lions from, what we call, calling stations
This simply consists in playing the sound of a species in distress, like a young buffalo, to attract lions in the surrounding areas and to count them simply.
Usually you would photograph them, photograph the lion, which come, to compare individuals between them and to be able to
 differentiate the lions.
Of course, you need to move the calling station to try to cover different territories and this is usually done by night.
And, as far as possible, just try to pay attention to the
 lion you attract.
Absolutely.
