Just like with other species, start by choosing
the ecological attributes to monitor. 
Then, based on these attributes, select the methods among the ones we will be presenting shortly that will provide information on the indicators to assess.
The direct line-transect method is recommended.
In this case, detect the animals as follows:
Early in the morning or in the late afternoon, observers slowly, at an average speed of one kilometer per hour, and quietly work along the transect line.
The weather can influence primate detection.
Some species cry less in windy conditions and they are all more difficult to see when it's raining.
Therefore, avoid counting during a shower or right after.
As soon as a primate is spotted, take note of the following information: the name or transect number, the distance traveled along the transect - measured, thanks to a (INAUDIBLE), the date, the time, the detection method - seen, heard, branch movement, falling fruit, animals running away, and so on.
The species, the distance between the observer and the animal, the angle of observation, the perpendicular distance between the animal and the transect line.
This is measured with a tape measure, a non-elastic rope, or optical or a laser range-finder.
Also, write down the information concerning the group of primates: the number of individuals in the group by gender, age group, and species, the surface area covered by the animals and their main activity: eating, traveling, social interaction, rest.
To analyse the data, two or three data sets are needed.
One: the distance traveled along the transect line, which is determined by multiplying the lines' total length by the number of times it was traveled.
Two, the number of groups encountered, specifically, groups having both male and female individuals.
Three, the forest surface on which a given number of primates were recorded.
This is obtained by multiplying the transect (INAUDIBLE) by the distance covered.
The relative abundance of a species or the number of groups per kilometer  traveled can be calculated using the first two sets of data.
With all three data sets, the population density can be calculated, expressed in groups per square kilometers using the DISTANCE software. which, as Emmanuel explained, considers detectability variations of animals in different zones.
Another approach, indirect this time, is nest counts.
When a nest is spotted, the process is just similar to when a primate is detected.
Some information is vital to capitalizing the nest counts per square kilometer: namely, the nest construction rate per individual given the age differences and the time it takes for nests to decay to a point that can no longer be identified as such.
This time depends on factors such as seasons, altitudes, species, etcetera.
Once you have information concerning nest-making and their decay rates per site and per season, it is possible to calculate reasonable estimates of the decline rate of gorilla or chimpanzee populations.
This often varies.
Finally, let's talk about call mapping.
Because of their powerful shouts, or calls, some animals can be detected from a greater distance than in observations.
This method is especially useful to indirect monitoring in places where monkeys or apes chatter loudly.
In the case of diurnal species, the observer should start working early in the morning, in many cases right before dawn.
Walk slowly at an average pace of one kilometer per hour and stop at certain marked locations to listen to the shouts or calls.
As soon as he hears the calls, he should be waiting between fifteen and thirty minutes when the interaction between the two groups is over.
In the case of nocturnal species, the detection work depends on the species.
Generally, bush babies squeal at nightfall and for around an hour at dawn.
The task should be repeated over several days depending on the species, the site, the season, and the weather conditions.
For particularly loud species, like the red colobus, three days can be enough to record all the groups present in the survey zone.
But more time is needed when shouts are scarce and quieter.
Generally speaking, the census should carry on until quality sets are obtained.
To record data, proceed as follows: when the observer hears shouts, he should take note of the following information.
The date, the time, the species, the type of call, the position of a call to where the observer is, the estimated distance between the observer and the animal, the observer's geographical coordinates at that moment.
If the same group can be heard after the observer has moved away, a new survey should be carried out so that the group position can be calculated more precisely by means of triangulation.
Finally, the information should be processed as follows: draw up a precise map of a surveyed area on graph paper and note the main topographic elements such as waterways, wetland, etcetera,
Copy this map as many times as needed, so that the data on different species can be noted separately.
On the map, write down the date and time on a pencil-drawn line where the shouts were recorded and where the observer was positioned.
The distance between the observer and the animal is estimated and also noted on the map.
Make sure to triangulate the shouts of a group heard at different moments.
Make sure not to count species that cover great distances quickly and that can be heard at different places, like mangabeys, twice.
To reduce this type of mistake, it is important to know the size of a surveyed zone, potential overlap between feeds, and traveling and feeding patterns, which you can obtain through long time service.
Note on the animals observed and not heard can also be written on the map.
This will enable you to draw up a complete table of all the present groups.
