Welcome to our MOOC on magnetic resonance.
This is the second half of chapter three where we shall speak about spin-spin couplings.
We should address the tricky issue of ‘equivalent nuclei’.
It turns out that these are very nicely described in Peter Hore's book.
I think it's one of the best books on this subject.
There are two forms of equivalence.
There is ‘chemical equivalence’.
That is fairly easy to understand.
That means that you have two nuclei that cannot be distinguished in chemical terms.
One cannot substitute one without substituting the other.
One cannot replace one.
One cannot conceive of a reaction that would affect one without affecting the other.
That's one thing.
And then there is the concept of ‘magnetic equivalence’ which is much more subtle and more difficult to define.
Let us start with a simple application.
We have a magnetically equivalent pair the two protons have the same coupling to the two fluorine nuclei.
So if we consider this coupling and this coupling, it turns out that by symmetry of the molecule, these two couplings must be the same.
Likewise if we started with the two fluorine nuclei, they also have the same couplings to the two protons.
These two couplings are the same.
But if we look at this coupling here, which is a ‘cis’ coupling, it has a different magnitude and perhaps even a different sign from this long-range coupling here, the ‘trans’ coupling.
So these are distinct and therefore, there are two different cases.
Peter Hore has a wonderful way of explaining how you can check for the existence of magnetically equivalent nuclei.
First of all, you define an ensemble of nuclei {a, b, c,…} of which you want to decide whether they are magnetically equivalent or not, such as in this case of proton ‘a’ and proton ‘b’.
And then you define external nuclei, if they exist.
This fluorine we call ‘z’,
Peter Hore uses that nomenclature.
He says:
If the J coupling between ‘a’ and ‘z’ is equal to the coupling between ‘b’ and ‘z’, and is also equal to the coupling between ‘c’ and ‘z’, etc. for all similar couplings, we have magnetic equivalence.
And if that is not the case as in this molecule, then we have only chemical equivalence.
This distinction has dramatic consequences.
The test, where we compare the scalar couplings between ‘a’, ‘b’, ‘c’ and an external nucleus ‘z’, has to be repeated for different external nuclei ‘z’.
For example we do it for ‘z’ and then we have to do it all over again for a nucleus ‘z prime’.
In practice it turns out that once you have obtained a negative answer for one of the nuclei ‘z’ you don't need to check the others.
Magnetic equivalence needs to be thought about carefully.
There are cases that are not obvious.
For example this is a dodecahedron-- the molecule has the formula C20H20.
If all carbons are carbon-12, which is not obvious, unless it is depleted in carbon-13, then we have no other nuclei than the 20 chemically equivalent protons. so there is no external nucleus ‘z’, and consequently we can't carry out the test.
Hence all 20 protons are magnetically equivalent and not merely chemically equivalent.
The same is true for a much more mundane molecule which is benzene. which has six protons.
They are all equivalent because there is no proton ‘z’ and no carbon ‘z’ that could make the six protons inequivalent.
Multiplet patterns can be used to check for molecular symmetry or to confirm or reject a hypothesis about the symmetry of the molecule.
Peter Hore has collected some wonderful examples of phosphorus-31 NMR spectra of compounds which contain only phosphorus and sulphur.
The large spheres represent phosphorus atoms and the small spheres sulphur atoms.
There are different arrangements.
Sulphur has no spin at least its dominant isotope has 99% abundance and no spin.
And therefore, we can ignore it and we we only have to worry about the chemical shifts, and about the chemical or magnetic equivalence, of the phosphorus nuclei.
In a configuration like this, there is no nucleus ‘z’. that could conceivably have different couplings with the four phosphorus nuclei.
Therefore all four nuclei ‘a’ are in the same environment.
They are chemically indistinguishable and are magnetically equivalent.
Therefore we speak of an A4 system.
This system has a different symmetry.
You immediately see that these two phosphorus nuclei are sitting between three sulphur atoms, whereas these phosphorus nuclei have another phosphorus as neighbour, and only two sulphur atoms as neighbours.
So chemically, they're quite different.
In fact, they also have different chemical shifts but when it comes to the symmetry, it turns out that the coupling between one of these nuclei ’A’ and the two nuclei ’X’ is equal and so we have an A2X2 system.
As a result, we have a triplet for A, and for X we also have a triplet.
This is a more complicated case where the phosphorus on top has three neighbouring sulphur atoms.
A bit like what we had before but at the bottom, we have a phosphorus atom which is squeezed between two other phosphorus atoms, whereas the other phosphorus atoms are squeezed between a phosphorus and two sulphur atoms.
So clearly we have three different chemical environments and we have an AMX2 system because the only magnetic equivalence is between these two X nuclei.
You can see the consequences.
Nucleus A gives a large triplet due to the coupling JAX between A and X. where X are the two neighbouring phosphorus nuclei and a smaller coupling JAM between A and the distant M nucleus.
So this is a wonderful example on how we can look at spectra and draw conclusions as to the symmetry of the molecule.
There are also amusing cases when we look at lithium-7 or at lithium-6.
Lithium-7 has a spin I = 3/2.
This is a little bit like boron-11 that we have discussed before.
In this case we consider a strange molecule which is actually a cluster comprising four lithium atoms arranged according to a tetrahedron.
It turns out that if you can attach tertiary butyl groups, that they are not attached to one of the lithium atoms but they tend to attach themselves to the middle of the triangular surfaces, to one of these sides of the cluster.
Very mysterious chemistry but NMR is without any doubt proving that this structure is the true structure and not the one that you might draw intuitively.
It turns out that because of this structure if we look at the lithium-7 spectrum, which has a spin I = 3/2, we shall see an ordinary binomial quartet because of the splittings to three equivalent carbon-13, since each lithium in effect ‘sees’ three carbon-13 nuclei.
For example, if you take the lithium nucleus at the top, it ‘sees’ this carbon-13 and this one and this one as equivalent.
And therefore, we have this wonderful quartet.
On the other hand, we could decide to enrich the cluster with lithium-6.
Lithium-6 has spin I = 1, so it will split a neighbouring carbon-13 into three equivalent lines with amplitudes 1:1:1 but since each carbon is coupled to three lithium-6 nuclei this gives rise to a strange non-binomial multiplet which is comprised of three interleaved triplets.
I vividly recommend that you to look at this carefully.
This is similar to what you have seen in diborane except that now there are couplings to three neighbouring nuclei.
In four-spin systems we have more complicated structures but they are fairly easy to rationalize.
In fact, we can simply take the proton NMR spectrum of dibromonitrobenzene.
This is a very simple molecule.
And we can see that we have a proton A which is squeezed between a proton P and a proton M.
The ortho-couplings are not exactly equal but they are similar.
The proton X is across the ring, so to speak, and has a long-range para coupling to A and medium-range couplings to the meta positions P and M.
And as a result, the A multiplet will be split into what is sometimes called the ‘pseudo-triplet’.
In fact it is a doublet of doublets with very close couplings.
The doublet fine structure is due to the para position X.
The proton M is split into a large doublet because of JAM, and each line is split into a doublet and again into a doublet first because of P and then because of X.
Likewise, the same logic applies to spin P which is very similar to spin M as far as the structure of the multiplet is concerned.
Finally, spin X shows a pseudo-triplet because the couplings to P and to M are almost equivalent.
Each component is split into a small doublet because of the para-coupling between X and M.
This kind of spectrum allows you to determine the molecular structure without any help.
There is an interesting phenomenon in scalar-coupled multiplets that is known as ‘strong coupling’, sometimes known as ‘second-order coupling’.
We begin with a case where the J splitting is much smaller than the difference in chemical shifts.
In this case we speak of an AX system but when the chemical shifts come closer, we notice that the multiplets not only become closer but also change their amplitudes.
The inner lines become stronger and the outer lines become weaker.
In such a case, we use two letters in the alphabet which are close together, so we may speak of an AB system.
Ultimately, if the two chemical shifts become degenerate, we have only one line left over, and we speak of an A2 system.
To understand strong coupling we have to use a little bit of quantum mechanics.
This is not treated in any detail in the first volume of Peter Hore that I recommended to you but there is a second book that you may wish to read next year that is written by Steve Wimperis, Jeremy Jones and the same Peter Hore, in the same Oxford Primer series.
This book speaks about quantum-mechanical effects.
In this case we have to explain how we start with an AX system, where we have just two doublets, and go to an AB system where the two doublets move close together so that the inner lines become more intense, to the limiting case of the A2 system.
It turns out that all three can be explained in one equation by saying that the bottom state where the two spins are parallel with the magnetic field is not affected by this phenomenon so they're always the same.
It is always a simple state with alpha-alpha.
Likewise, the upper state where the two spins are anti-parallel is unaffected.
It doesn't matter whether the system is strongly or weakly coupled.
But the intermediate states called psi_2 and psi_3 are mixed.
In fact, they are neither alpha-beta nor beta-alpha but there is an admixture between the two with coefficients given by the cosine of an angle chi and sine of the same angle chi.
This angle is determined by the ratio of the J coupling and the difference in chemical shifts.
In terms of simple trigonometry, we can draw the chemical shift difference horizontally, in units of Hz (Hertz), and we draw the scalar coupling vertically, also units of Hz.
We can make a little diagram and this angle is twice chi.
You can immediately see that when the J coupling becomes much smaller than the difference in chemical shifts then the angle chi goes to zero.
The limit of chi going to zero means that the cosine goes to one and the sine goes to zero, so this is a pure alpha-beta state.
Alpha for spin A and beta for spin B.
Likewise, if we take the limit of chi going to zero, only the cosine term survives so this would be a pure state where spin A has a beta polarization and spin B has an alpha polarization.
You can see from this diagram that, the larger J is compared to the difference in chemical shifts, the steeper the slope, the closer the angle 2 chi approaches 90 degrees and therefore the angle chi approaches 45 degrees.
It is interesting to see the limit where chi = 45 degrees.
We see that the cosine and the sine become equal. so the coefficients are just 
1/(square root of two), times
(alpha-beta + beta-alpha).
Likewise, in the limit for chi
= 45 degrees, when the J coupling is much larger than the difference in chemical shifts, the other function goes to
 1/(square root of two), times
(- alpha-beta + beta-alpha).
We have minus alpha-beta plus beta-alpha.
In the case of an A2 system, you see there is a symmetrical linear combination that we have here.
This is symmetrical in the sense that if you do a permutation of spins A and B, the wave function doesn't change.
It is invariant to permutation and is known as totally symmetric.
Whereas for the other wave function, the one that I just commented on, is anti-symmetric with respect to a permutation of the spins.
It turns out that the symmetric state, together with the top state and the bottom state, together form what is known as a triplet of states, that is to say three states with the same symmetry.
Whereas this state here is known as a singlet state.
A remarkable thing is that the peak that we see in the spectrum is made up of two lines, only two lines, that are degenerate and appear on top of each other.
One line corresponds to the bottom transition of the triplet, and the other line corresponds to the top transition of the triplet.
Whereas the transitions from the bottom state to the singlet state are forbidden. This is represented by dotted lines.
I cross them out to show that these two transitions are completely forbidden.
In fact, they are only virtual, so to speak.
If you look at their frequencies, they are a plus and minus J away from the central component but their intensities are vanishingly weak and that is why we cannot see them.
This kind of quantum mechanics has been known for decades but has gained some renewed interest very recently because it turns out that the populations can flow quite freely within the triplet manifold as a result of longitudinal or spin-lattice relaxation.
Whereas populations that are locked in the singlet state cannot flow from the singlet to the triplet states.
If one can contrive some way of populating the singlet state, then the populations would be locked up, and one can have so-called long-lived states.
This is the speciality of Malcolm Levitt in Southampton.
We have done a lot of work in Lausanne to improve techniques to populate singlet states.
This concludes part two of this chapter.
Thank you for your attention.
