Welcome back everybody to our course on smart specialisation strategies.
Now in week three we'll have a more detailed look at how really develop such a strategy.
With a bit of theoretical foundation and the properties of that concept in the first two weeks, we now really get to the work, to build such a strategy.
To do so let's first look at a few properties which need to be reflected in this process.
As the name of three S already says, such strategy is smart and special. It's smart in the sense that it provides intelligent combinations and individual solutions for the region.
And it is special in that sense that from this process there should resolve new specialities for the regional economy.
While it builds on existing assets, new specialities should be generated.
Given these properties, it is probably not surprising that there is no one size fits all.
There's no blueprint for a smart specialisation strategy which fits each and every region.
Instead, the strategy itself, the contents of the strategy, of course, have to be individually adapted to the region, but not only the contents, but also the process leading to this strategy, the analytical foundations of that strategy must be adapted already to the region itself and its properties and assets.
But, of course, this is not the end of that session.
There are a number of tools, of materials and also a stylised process available that you can follow when developing such a strategy.
Always keep in mind that's not fixed, but needs to be individually adapted but you can take out the elements out of these tool boxes to build your individual analytical process.
It's a little bit like if you imagine you want to build some new furniture.
I can give you a blueprint for a wooden table one by two and a half metres but probably it won't help any because the space you have is much smaller and actually, you want to have a glass and not wood.
So what we do here is we provide you with a process which you can follow, do the measurement, get a shopping list, cut the materials, and so on.
We also provide the materials, you can use glass, wood or maybe you want to use steel.
And we can provide you with some tools, a toolbox which can be used in building that furniture.
You have to build it yourself, but you will get a lot of things you can use in that process.
Now what will we do throughout that week?
The first session is really devoted to a suggested process with elements which are absolutely necessary for building a strategy, but also elements which can be individually adapted.
In the second session, we will look at a tool box which is available for particularly analytical part of the strategy building. In the third session we look at the data which can be used in such a process and then the properties the data must have which is being used in such a process.
Session four is devoted to entrepreneurial resources, as this is especially important for smart specialisation, and actually the unique property of that concept.
And finally we'll give an example how such a dialogue and interactions section in the process building could function.
We will have a lot of examples throughout the week, the further we go into sessions the more we have to work examples, because there is less given structures available, and we will very often look at the canton of Ticino.
For one reason it helps to do the examples with one canton, it gives you a better overview how the different steps interact with each other.
But, of course, there's also the reason that we know the canton of Ticino very well, coming from Switzerland, and it is necessary in the detailed process that you know the region.
And last not least, we already did such processes as with
Ticino therefore a lot of material to build on was available.
Now before going into the process, what do these other institutions say about that process?
The EU for example says: sound analyses of regional assets and technologies is part of building a smart specialisation strategy, or the OECD puts it at identifying and selecting a limited number of priority areas, identify and select a limited number, focusing on their strengths and their comparative advantages, the strength and a comparative advantage of the region.
What do we get out of these definitions?
First of all, we need a structured process to really achieve the goals given by these definitions.
Without such a process we will not have a sound base of analyse and probably not identify the strengths and all comparative advantages.
And it must be based on facts, that is very clear from that definition, therefore data is needed for the process, it's absolutely essential to build on data.
Now let's go back to what you already know.
This picture was already provided in week one.
We will again follow this picture, but this time with more focus on: what are the steps to be done in a strategy building process?
Of course, we again have to start with the economic and industrial structures of a region.
But before going further, there is one step which might be a little bit surprising in the first sight, but to our experience is very important. And this is the definition of the region we are talking about, of the region the strategy should be valid for.
Why is this so important?
If different people involved, and there are many people involved in the strategy and in the implementation of that strategy, if these people have different ideas about what region we're talking about, the strategy in the end won't work.
Therefore, doing this step explicitly helps a lot in building the strategy successfully.
But it's also important that you create some kind of commitment, which all of the steps can help by.
If everybody talks about the same kind of region, then they commit themselves stronger towards this region.
When you do so, you have to keep in mind that administrative and functional orders are not already the same, or functional region is not the same as in an administrative region.
The functional region is where there are heavy economic interactions.
And actually a strategy should be built for a region, for a geographic area which has heavy economic interactions with each other. Of course, the complete world interacts today with each other, but interactions are very strong that should be a region, a strategy is valid for.
Of course you also have to follow administrative borders and the final definition will be a compromise.
But it is very important, in the end, that you agree on one definition and that everybody involved in the strategy is clear about that definition.
And this is why we put that at the start of the process of developing a 3S.
A note on the name region.
Here, and in the following, we often use "region" as a synonym for the geographical area the strategy should be valid for.
Of course that can be a city, can be a city region, a city area, a metropolitan area, there are many different names a smart specialisation strategy should work for, and we just use region for all of them as a name.
It is important that they work together as a functional area and their economic interactions, it doesn't really matter what it is named.
Clearly, the next step is the base of evidence.
Here actually the most analytical work is necessary.
To be done, there might be a lot available already, there might be more work to be done, but you need to produce a lot of inputs in that part.
Actually, different kinds of views are necessary here, you have to look at the world and the competitive position of the region and the regional industries, the regional economy, but you also have to look inside the region, get a detailed view on the region itself and on its assets and properties.
As there is a lot of elements in there, we will look at that later on again in some more detail, let's first go on with the process.
The next input is something the region can't change, which is given from the regional perspective.
It's the global mega trends, the trends are worldwide and driving the economic conditions of the region as well. That could be things like aging of society, the globalisation itself is such a mega-trend, or to digitalisation of production is also such a mega-trend.
And the second part here is the general purpose technologies.
Again something which is not driven by the region, but kind of given from the outside of the region, but must be part of the analysis. Again, digitalisation is somewhere in between.
Digitalisation could be named all the communication technologies, but also things like nanotechnology for example, or new materials are such general purpose technology that can be applied in different parts of the economy.
Of course, you're not just needing a list of these trends and technologies.
You also need to analyse how they influence the specific characteristics, the specific assets, the specific economy within the region, how important they are for the region and how exposed is the region to these changes.
That is actually part of the analyse in the base of evidence.
Until now these steps, global mega trends, the base of evidence with an outside and inside view is pretty well known from other economic strategies as well, but now we come to that part which is really particularly for smart specialisation strategy.
That's the analysis of entrepreneurial resources available in the region.
In any region there are entrepreneurial activities, there might be more or there might be less, but certainly there are some activities in this field.
Particularly if you define that entrepreneurialism in the broad sense is not just building start up companies, but it can be entrepreneurial activities in existing companies, it can also be an earlier stage in the innovation and invention process.
But there are certainly activities around, and you should analyse these activities so that you get a base of information, what entrepreneurial activity you can build the strategy on.
All this information in the end has to be combined and brought together, particularly as, usually, many different people are involved in these different steps of the process, they all and their information needs to be brought together, therefore the dialogue and interaction part of the strategy building is quite an important element.
And then we go to what we already know.
Of course we have to define the strategy itself, we have to define our priority areas, the promising areas, then we have to define activities in these areas, projects, networks, all these kind of things, so that the strategy really is implemented.
Then what you also already know is we should create that circle by that transformative activities building critical mass by our activities so that we begin to influence economic structure and the whole process actually can be started from the beginning again.
Because it's not a one time off shot, a smart specialisation strategy, but it's a continuously adapted process and a continuously repeated process actually.
Once you've had success with one priority area that probably drops out, but then another area might be a new priority area to be developed and to generate the change in the economy which we want to achieve.
Part of this continuous process is, of course, monitoring of the process, of the success of the strategy, of the impact of the strategy at different stages.
On the priority areas, we have to look if this is really the right priorities. Do they provide strategic value for the region? Is the priority on the activities area, of course, we have a usual project monitoring, project evaluation on going.
Then we have to analyse if you see the critical mass, does our priority areas really create critical mass in the economy?
And then finally is that really resulting in a structural change in the economy, or not?
And if any of these fail the test, we have to, of course, go back to that step in the process and review it.
If it's all successful, then probably the priority at some point it's kind like the change is achieved and we can look for a new priority areas.
Now, summing up, quickly what we have seen here.
We need a structural process for a smart specialisation strategy development.
It's a complex process, it has many steps and elements which have to be brought together in a clever way and which have to successfully interact with each other, not just standing side by side.
It's a multistage process, we have a couple of areas, we have an analytical part, we have a dialogue and interaction part and then we have a strategy formulation part and finally a monitoring part, there's a consecutive order to that part.
It is individual for any region.
There is no one size fits all, you have to adapt, the strategy itself has to be adapted to the region's specific, but also the process needs to be adapted to the region specifics to be successful, but still we have some structure provided which helps us building it.
It is interactive, as I have already pointed out, and it's continuous, it never ends really.
A successful strategy just leads to new priority areas and new activities, but also in any step of the process implementation it can be necessary to go one step back and do the analyse again and change the process.
Data is essentially required for that process.
Without a sound base of evidence, which is data driven, the process will only be successful accidentally, but not structurally. And there are two important parts of analytic input. One is the base of evidence, we discussed a little bit which it would be, we will have a look at that in the next session in more detail, and the entrepreneurial resources available in the region.
Again we will look at that in an example in a later session again, but we have a little bit of an idea what is in there.
Thank you for your attention for that session.
In the next part of that session we will have a look at a few more details of that process.
