Let's revise what we learned this week.
On this third week, we focused on the treatment of organic waste.
We learned the basics of two very common organic waste treatment technologies, namely composting and anaerobic digestion.
Remember, composting is a controlled decomposition of raw organic material into compost, which is carried out by microorganisms in the presence of oxygen.
We distinguished the active phase, when temperatures can reach up to 70 degrees and thermophilic bacteria are active, and the curing phase, when both temperature and oxygen consumption drop and mesophilic bacteria are active.
In a different module, we covered the main important operational parameters that need to be considered when composting is carried out.
These are: Carbon/nitrogen ratio, particle size and porosity, moisture content, pH, and temperature and climate.
We then introduced different composting technologies which are commonly used in low- and middle-income countries.
Do you remember their names?
For instance, which one is the one on the bottom right, or the one on the top left?
I hope you remember!
We compared these 5 technologies regarding 5 different criteria:
Investment and maintenance cost, space and time required, as well as labour needed. In order to provide you with a more hands-on feeling of composting, we introduced
2 very interesting study cases.
One from Dhaka in Bangladesh, shown on the picture on the left, and one from Temesi, Indonesia, shown on the picture on the right.
We then moved to learn about anaerobic digestion, as a treatment technology for biomass.
Anaerobic digestion is a collection of processes, where, similar to what happens during the composting, microorganisms break down biodegradable material. However, in this case, this happens in the absence of oxygen.
Anaerobic decomposition happens in a 4-step biochemical process, which happen partly simultaneously.
These are: hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis.
This is an interesting technology, because it generates methane, which is flammable and can be used as source of energy.
Similar to composting, the anaerobic digestion also has important operational parameters that need to be considered.
In this case we have: feedstock
characteristics, such as total solids or volatile matter content, organic loading rate, pH, temperature, hydraulic retention time, carbon/nitrogen ratio, and particle size. We then saw different anaerobic digestion technologies, which are suitable for a low- and middle-income country context; all of them wet, continuous feeding, and mesophilic.
What about their names?
Do you remember them?
We then proceeded to learn some hints on how to operate and maintain anaerobic digestion plants.
We looked at how to dewater, store, and make use of the produced biogas.
And we also discussed important criteria, favouring the choice of anaerobic digestion as a treatment technology.
And finally we learned how to calculate the volume of a fixed-dome reactor for the example of a school with 250 students.
In the coming modules, we will introduce some more innovative technologies to treat organic waste.
See you then!