So monitoring mobile species requires the implementation of suitable monitoring systems.
In Ecology, there are several ways of observing mobile animals and this can be done broadly or not depending on animals traveling distance.
When animals travel of a shorter distances big mammal ecologist often use what is called radio tracking.
This is a monitoring or detection system for animals previously fitted with a radio transmitter.
The animals confirmations, their environment and ways of moving about are considered when fitting the transmitter.
In the case of large animals, harnesses and collars are used and whenever the harness is too big adhesive tapes or subcutaneous or even surgical implants are preferred.
You must remember not to either equip a small animal with transmitters that will exceed
6% of their weight.
Another technique for animals traveling over short distances provided they are easy to find again with the bit to use bands or colored marks.
This is obviously more convenient than radio transmitters.
The animal is equipped with a non-bird ring and a bright colored tag or plate to facilitate each identification from a short distance.
This will help clearly to recognize it and in a group settings to monitor each movement and behavior individually.
Parts of their coat
can also be blench to monitor individual animals of a species on a territory.
This is by the way of them carried out on animals such as large birds of prey or wading birds.
And for animals traveling of a long distances ecologist essentially use
GPS tags or ARGOS tags which shows the animals location from a distance.
The GPS, this is global positioning systems.
The GPS then has the benefit of recording location with great precision of not having a range limit and also it gives the possibility of choosing the time and the frequency of data receptions.
In the special case of migratory birds, it isn't uncommon to band the animal to monitor movement but these requires using the capture.
This is to put the band and recapture again the individual
 to (INAUDIBLE) results.
The only exception is when monitoring large species where it is possible to read the larger range from a distance.
All the techniques that uses tags and transmitters help finding living animals but also the carcasses which is a very useful when studying the causes of animal’s death.
This is also a techniques that gives the possibility to obtain important information on territorial limits and also interaction with different population.
Also, it gives information on breeding areas and rate and food intake breeding areas, rate, food intake and any other behavior.
They are therefore excellent techniques that will complete which is complementing other direct monitoring techniques that we have talked about earlier.
Even though they resemble a research more than strictly speaking monitoring.
This is due to their cost.
The indicator collection time and thereby information to be processed by management to make them much more costly for management.
