Welcome back Nature, In Code. 
We're in Chapter 3, Lecture 13.
We're approaching the end of this chapter.
Chapter 3 is a very rich chapter.
We learned new Java script concepts. We learned how to visualize our data using child script in the browser.
We developed stochastic simulations of genetic drift and we learned about genetic drift and we learned that it acts to reduce genetic variation and we learned about the process, the speed of the process and how it depends on the population size.
So quite a lot of information there.
So in these last few lectures
I'd like to introduce one more concept that is very important in the context of genetic drift and that's the concept of the effective population size.
So we'll do in this lecture 
I'll explain this idea.
The basic idea behind it.
And then in the final lecturers we'll implement this idea, using the code that we previously developed, so let's get started.
So what is the effective population size?
Well, here's what it is.
It's the size of an ideal population 
--and we'll talk about what that means--that shows the same decay of genetic variation.
There's some decay of genetic variation as the actual population of interest.
So it is the size of an ideal population that shows the same decay of genetic variation as the actual population of interest.
So what does it mean?
Let's make an example.
So let's say you're working with a population that you can observe and where you can measure the genetic variation.
Let's say you could measure this over a number of generations and then you could plot it something like this.
It decays in some in some way.
So this is now your actual population.
We're gonna call it census population.
Let's say you have a population of N=200.
So 200 individuals in your population and you observe this decay of genetic variation. Now could go ahead and say,
"I just learned about this mathematical framework that will allow me to predict the decay of genetic variation due to drift all they need to do now is to plug in this number, N, which is 200 and I should get the correct prediction"
And then you go ahead and do this and you find something like this that doesn't quite match.
So what's going on here.
So this is the prediction right in your ideal population.
So this is the population of this mathematical model: N=200.
So why do we call this ideal?
Keep in mind, we're still working in this extremely simplifying world.
I mean we just came from Hardy Weinberg, where everything was extremely simplified for various reasons.
The only change we made now going from chapter 2 to chapter 3 is that we, change this assumption that the population was infinite to a finite population such as N=200.
But there are still many many simplifying assumptions here like we don't have any sex or gender.
We don't have any overlapping generations.
We don't have any spatial structuring; none of that realistic stuff.
But of course your actual population and has all these things because it's a real world population.
But the population of our mathematical model doesn't.
So this is a very idealized population hence the word, <i>ideal</i>.
So what you could do this, you could say, how do I have to change this number so I do get this pattern and then he tweak this a little bit in your model and you finally find a number that recreates this pattern quite well.
And let's say you find this number to be your ideal population of N=100.
So if you plug in N=100 into these formula, into this framework, then you do indeed get exactly this pattern that you observe in your actual population, your census population and so this is now the effective population side so in your case, the effects population size, which is usually denoted as "Ne" is 100.
Why? Because even though your population, your actual population has 200 individuals-- from a genetic perspective it behaves like an idealized population of 100 individuals.
And this is really the important number.
To some extent you can argue, well it doesn't really matter how many individuals you do observe in the population
The question is, <i>how</i> does that population behave from a genetic perspective assuming of course you are interested in the genetics of that population.
That is therefore the interesting number from a genetics perspective; it's effective population size.
Why are we even talking about this?
Isn't this some kind of
"strange edge case?"
No, it actually turns out that in almost all cases, the effective population size is actually <i>smaller</i> than the census population size-- and in many cases actually substantially so.
So really substantially smaller than the census population.
And if you don't know about this concept then you're going to make all kinds of wrong predictions about your population because you're simply only ever using this N that you measured but your population behaves very differently from a genetics perspective. so I want to give you one example where this is the case, and where the affected population size can indeed be much, much smaller than the actual population size.
So here's the example.
We have so far assumed implicitly or explicitly in the code that the population size remains constant over time.
Now in reality this might not be true.
Your population size might fluctuate... this might look even more chaotic, but a very common case where this is not true, is that you have a population size that is fairly constant over time and for one reason or another, it suddenly crashes down to very low levels and then eventually comes back up to the previous levels.
And this is a so-called population bottleneck.
This can happen in many cases for example, individuals from a large population may split off and migrate away to another location and build a new population there from a few initial individuals.
This is something that's happened time and time again.
For example, when human started colonizing the planet-- it still happens of course all the time in biological systems...
Another example that comes to mind is when viral or bacterial populations transmit themselves from one host to the next-- as happens all the time with bacterial infections and viral infections such as influenza, and so on.
So basically, what happens is a host has a very large population of viral or bacterial individuals inside the body and then somehow transmits this to another susceptible individual.
Now not all of the bacteria or all of the viral particles get transmitted.
Only a very small population get transmitted and in that new host, they start growing rapidly, creating a new large population size.
So these populations constantly go through rather severe bottlenecks
Which in most extreme cases even be just one or two particles or bacterial cells.
So bottlenecks occur all the time.
So what are the effects of bottlenecks?
Well we can easily understand this by taking an extreme example where we have a population at a given size then it crashes dramatically.
And then in the next generation goes back up to the previous levels.
The reality looks probably more like this, but this is a good sort of simplified example to see what's going on.
And we can simply assume now that we have for example,
1,000 individuals here, then it crashes down to 10 individuals.
And then it goes back up to 1,000 individuals.
So 3 generations.
A dramatic change in the middle.
What is the effect of population size here?
How does this population behave from a genetic perspective?
One way you could now approach this is you could say,
Well, I'm gonna take the average, so I got a thousand individuals and then I have 10 and then have 1,000 again.
And I'm going to divide this by 3
And this gives me roughly 670 individuals.
So that's one way to look at it.
The take home message of this lectures is that this way would be very wrong.
If you would assume now your population behaves like an average of 607 individuals
From a genetics perspective that will be very misleading.
It does not.
Why does it not? 
Because the effective population size is not calculated as the average.
It's another type of mean.
This is what we're used to in everyday usage taking the mean.
This is in fact the arithmetic mean.
There are many other means.
One of those means is the harmonic mean.
What is the harmonic mean of a set of numbers? x1 x2... x3 and so on. xn, okay.
Well, here's how it's defined.
It is N divided by 1 over x1
+ 1 over x2 + 1 over x3 and so on.
+ 1over xn.
That is the harmonic mean and the the effective population size is the harmonic mean of the population sizes over time.
And so we can now plug in these numbers to calculate the harmonic mean So let's do that.
Again, right. This is the situation.
1,000 and then 10 and then 1,000.
So harmonic mean is 3 because we have three numbers...
Over 1 over 1,000 + 1 over 10
+ plus 1 over 1,000.
So what is this?
Well this is equal to 3 over 0.001 + 0.1 + 0.001.
Which is 3 over 0.102.
And that is roughly 30, okay.
And keep in mind before, when we just calculated the average, we had 670 individuals.
So this population behaves, from a genetic perspective, as if it were only 30 individuals and you would've assu--
Anyone who doesn't know about this would have assumed 670 individuals.
That's an underestimate of 20 factor 20, roughly.
So an extreme difference between the effective population size and the average; the real average.
In fact, if we now assumed-- let's assume that we have here
10,000 individuals. 
Then it crashes to 10, and then it goes back up to 10,000 individuals.
So our calculation would simply be here now 1 over 10,000
+ 1 over 10 + 1 over 10,000.
Correspondingly we would have to add another 0 here and another 0 here, and this now would really be 0.1002
<i>but</i>, this would still be roughly 30.
Nothing really changes here about this equation that's in... would have a substantial effect.
However, the average is actually 6,700.
So now we could in fact underestimate or rather <i>overestimate</i>, excuse me, the size by a factor 200.
We would think this big population behaves like 6,700 individuals, but indeed it's still only behaves as if they were only 30 individuals.
Which will have a very, very different dynamic as we now know in terms of genetic drift.
So you could increase these numbers as much as you wanted to.
It doesn't matter how many zeroes you're going to add here.
You're just going to have to add zeroes here which would just push this 2 further out but nothing fundamentally changes about the fact that this will be roughly 30 individuals.
So it's not these numbers here that determine the overall effect on the population size and effective population size.
But it's this number here and that's just you know a necessity of the definition of the harmonic mean is that these numbers, the small numbers have a much much bigger impact.
They're the ones who are basically driving the whole thing.
And so that's why these bottlenecks are so important.
They drive the whole thing in a way where what's up here becomes almost irrelevant.
And if you don't know this-- as you can see here-- you can very quickly, substantially overestimate your population size-- your effective population size.
You could think it's <i>thousands</i> of individuals, but instead it's just dozens.
So this is the take home message here.
Bottlenecks happen all the time.
It's one of the examples where the effective population size is smaller.
It's fundamentally, substantially smaller than just the average.
You can of course just accept this at face value, which is what I had to do back in the day when
I learned about this stuff.
You're in fact, in a much better position now, because you have code in place where you can now go and implement these bottlenecks and see if that is really true.
See if your population really behaves in a way that's captured by this harmonic mean.
So you're in a much better position and we should go ahead and implement this now using our simulation code.
So you just learned about this important concept of the effective population size.
Which is really the important population size to know if you want to know how the population behaves from a genetic perspective.
And in the next videos, we're going to implement this idea in child script.
So I'll see you in the next lecture.
