Hi. I am Aurélie Favier and this tutorial will explain how to stop hydration by solvent exchange and how to prepare polish section for scanning electron microscopy.
After preparation of a sample of cement paste, mortar, concretes you want to test it at specific times 1 day 3 days 28 days. Today I will show you how to stop hydration on a sample of cement based, first the sample may be strong enough to be so.
It's a simple it's not strong enough. Then you will definitely stop the hydration using freeze drying or filtration under isopropanol. Once the slid is good
It must be emerge in a sufficient amount of isopropyl with a 99 percent accurate.
It would be necessary to renew the solution regularly the first 24 hours and then every
24 hours for 4 to 7 days maximum the disk will run dry in the scuttle for 48 hours. You solvent is finally ready to be put in prison and polished it would first be polish with 1200 grain size sand paper and still a flat shiny interface is obtain you can get a small piece and residual must be blown. The sample is then placed in the mold to be resin coated. The mold ear made silicon commodes but commercial mode can be used. In order to avoid air bubbles. The sample are kept under vacuum during the introduction of a resin or weather. You can also prove a resin first and then vacuum it to remove any air bubbles. We are going to prepare a resin to  a mixture of 80 percent resin with 20 percent our dinner. This resin is well-mixed and smoke a pipe to fill the molds. The amount of resin can be so that our simple Avocet act. And all them some minute and or vacuum again.
The resin hardens within 24 hours and then it is possible to do the samples.
I will now show you how to polish the samples. First of all we will slightly discover a simple with a 1200 sandpaper. A few seconds of polishing to remove a thin layer of resin at 150 RPM. The trace of a mold must be no longer observe and continuous line must not be observed between the samples.
And the resin I did is present on the right picture then the polishing is carried out using a spray containing particles of diamonds and a lubricant petroleum. There are actually three steps corresponding to a diamond particle size. We always start with the biggest one nine microns and then the finest one, one microns, in this slide I'll show you some indicative time of each step depending on the simple types mortar based concrete. Of course we must adapt to your samples and simple age it is recommend to not rush and control regularly the first time at least one drop every two recipient of lubricant is needed. And the diamond particles must be renewed every
45 minutes. Samples should be cleaned with an ultrasonic bath in isopropanol between each step. It is recommend to have one polishing disk size.
Finally you sample after cleaning maybe store 48 hours invidia sector to remove any trace of solvent that can contaminate the electron microscope before to be used for microscopy. We need to have a conductive layer typically for Polish exposure of cement.
We caught with carbon we put a piece of carbon free then we are just out of a sample to get a carbon layer approximately 10 to 15 nanometers. Finally we put and a vacuum simple and we can apply Eichhorn to polarize the Carbon on the simple surface.
Your sample is finally ready.
