Welcome to today's lesson on analyzing the governance by government of protected areas.
Its role in the conservation of nature in
Africa turns out to be crucial.
Of course, you can refer to the WCPA guidelines on governance to find out more, and especially chapter three.
I also recommend the 87th edition of the NAPA letters, here, which summarizes a study we have recently done on the governance model in Africa.
You can download both of them on our website papaco.org.
We will have a look at the history, the special features and some weaknesses of governance by government, with our friend
Paul Ndiaye.
Nearly everywhere in French-speaking Africa, as well as in other places, the first protected areas created in the beginning of the twentieth century are a result of public initiatives in places such as Senegal, Ivory Coast, French
Sudan,
Guinea-Conakry, Upper Volta, Dahomey, Niger, etc.
They enabled the first state protected areas to be created.
Up until now, these state protected areas have the most widespread form of governance in
Africa, as we have already said.
Although this is progressively evolving.
Colonial administration took some initial decisions, which were not reconsidered by the independent African States, which replaced them mainly from the 1960s.
History does in fact allow for the state initiative to have a large role in terms of creating protected areas.
On top of this, it seems important to formulate two statements.
First of all, the new state protected areas that were created after countries became independent are limited in number, except for a few countries, like Guinea-Bissau especially.
But, even in this case, the size of the areas is much more modest everywhere than those of the previous generation.
Then, there's the conditions the state protected areas were set up in that are constantly affecting them through an authoritarian approach.
This generates a lot of frustration, which is at the origin of the continuous conflicts, something which we will talk about later.
State governance exercises a prominent influence in the national protected area networks, which are organized everywhere in Africa, particularly, but not only, in French-speaking
Africa.
Therefore, for example, the large parks in
West Africa, like Niokolo-Koba in Senegal, or Comoé in
Ivory Coast, etc.
Mole National Park in Ghana, W-Arli-Pendjari that we have already seen, well, all of these parks are governed by the state.
Historically, governance of state protected areas, whenever the different entities may have been established, does not suffer from any ambiguity in any of the countries.
It is exclusively protected by the public authority, directly or by delegated services, such as the Water and Forestry Service, or the National Park service.
Sometimes relatively autonomous entities have been created as an attempt to give them more flexibility.
That is the case with bureaus, agencies autonomous public institutions, etc.
But this type of governance always seem authoritarian and rigid.
These were the essential ingredients to produce the success that it received initially, at least.
All of the French-speaking states have applied this model, sometimes without changing it, up until recently.
Most of the English-speaking countries have done the same.
This approach, which involves imposing decisions, presupposes that two conditions be met: have the means and the technical ability as well.
Means include first of all legality and legitimacy, essential for recognition by all relevant actors, in one way or another, by the protected area.
The state has the legal rights to decide to create a protected area and to manage it alone.
However, having the legal right to do it is not necessarily acknowledged by the local population, especially if they were evicted when the protected areas were created.
The technical ability refers to managing human and financial resources, which are also necessary for establishing their authority.
Strangely, this ability has frequently caused problems for the states.
They have found themselves in other emergency situations, where they have been unable to mobilize personnel and provide sufficient budgetary allocations to cope with the needs for managing them.
Governance by the state is weakened and state protected areas are threatened in every way: by trespassing, by poaching, by livestock straying.
This last point partly explains the reality of the situation that has brought the African states to loosen up on exclusive governance, which they had been strict about up until then.
The conditions surrounding the creation of the first protected area networks greatly justify the primacy of state protected areas, which still exists.
However, their inefficiency in some situations has ended up negatively affecting this type of governance in many places.
That's why they have been extended to other actors, private or community actors, as we will see in the next videos.
There are large differences between countries or regions.
There we go, that's the end of the lesson.
The next episode will examine another type of governance of protected areas: private protected areas.
Have an excellent day.
Partnership between André Hoffmann, École
Polythechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
IUCN (France-IUCN partnership)
This MOOC is an academic collaboration between the following institutions:
Produced within the RESCIF framework and from the EPFL MOOCS for Africa initiative.
