Welcome to today's lesson where we will be introducing private protected areas, which are pretty rare in Africa, especially in French-speaking Africa, as we have already said.
As usual in this module, I suggest that you refer to the World Commission on Protected Areas guidelines, to find out more.
You could also look at the 85th and 86th editions of the NAPA letters, which summarize a study undertaken by PAPACO on the topic, and that you can download once again from the website papaco.org.
Let's now turn to Paul who will explain it all to us.
The appearance of private protected areas demonstrates an important change in strategies for organizing conservation.
Through them, the number of protected areas have generally diversified and cautiously increased.
This type of protected area is much more widespread in English-speaking countries, than it is in French-speaking countries.
For IUCN, private governance includes all governance that is not undertaken by governments, not by indigenous people, and not by community groups,
Private governance is also governance that isn't shared between these different actors.
Governance of private protected areas can therefore include property and management by individuals or groups of individuals, by NGOs, by companies, by existing commercial companies, or by companies created by groups of private owners in order to manage the private protected areas together.
It could also be done by owners of protected areas who manage them to make profit, for example ecotourism companies.
It could be done by research entities, such as universities, or a fieldwork department etc.
And finally, it could be done by religious entities; it is rare, but it happens.
We have said it before, the history of conservation in Africa has been one of progressive expansion towards new actors, and so to more than just the state.
Even though they were never really absent from protected areas, for example, they managed hotel establishments in the parks, these private actors were not really in a governance position up until recently.
The decay of these infrastructures in the private areas of the state, the drop in the number of visitors, the unavailability of public financial resources for the renewal of equipment, the pressure from sponsors, etc. have caused public officials to call on the private sector more and more.
This has had mitigated results for some of the African countries, and there is a high dependence on the quality of the governance set up.
These private sector companies are often considered to be more able to respond to urgent situations quickly due to their ability to mobilize funds.
In reality, when possible, the acquisition of a territory dedicated to conservation, by a private actor, normally leads to private governance being implemented.
However, the situation is not as simple on the ground.
The responsibility that results from having a private status is rarely maintained solely by the owners of the state-controlled protected areas.
Property and fauna have differing statuses in many French-speaking countries, which is why it is hard to identify the type of governance.
This means a strictly private governance is hard to recognize.
Reality strangely imposes a shared governance formula with the state or with local communities and it could just be to secure the investments made.
We particularly find examples of private governance in the strict sense in English-speaking Africa, like in Kenya for example.
Indeed, in Kenya, many conservancies. have private owners which can bring many problems especially in terms of handing over, over time
Let's have a look at the example of Lewa, which is a conservancy, nestled at the bottom of Mount Kenya.
An essential quality that private actors possess involves their expertise and their ability to mobilize significant financial means quickly.
In fact, these means probably prompted them to be interested in protected areas being set up. because profitability is sometimes important.
Investing in protected areas equates with an additional motivation.
The political and financial context in the end of the 20th century goes hand in hand with a trend for the private sector to be increasingly interested in African protected areas.
The private sector's interest in conservation provokes legitimate questions about the conditions, the amount of and the type of participation.
Is it a strategy to involve the private sector or should we start talking about the privatization of protected areas?
The state could consider surrendering public land to private entities, especially in the form of long leases.
The emblematic cases most often involve classified land.
Examples of these can be noticed nearly everywhere in Africa, like in Senegal for example, in the classified forests Bandia or Fathala.
Be careful though as these territories are managed more like zoos where animals with diverse origins are brought together and it is therefore ex situ conservation.
And so, they are not really protected areas.
Some conceded hunting zones in classified forests that are managed sustainably by private entities and that match the description of a protected area, would be classified in that category.
This type of plot, when it is managed optimally, can however have a serious negative impact on the local population, for example.
Ouaba lives in Naboandaga, a waterfront village in the east of Burkina Faso, in the Singou Wildlife Reserve that covers an area of nearly 500,000 acres.
Since it was created in 1955, access to the park is subject to restrictive rules for the local population.
With time, new boundaries have been put in place which further reduce the residents' access to the resources.
Here, we are at the boundary of the park.
Our fields were on the other side before.
The néré and shea trees, amongst others, are also in there.
Our fields were in there, so it was like we had lost our fields.
My husband, who has livestock, can no longer bring his animals here either.
If animals enter the park, they are seized.
He doesn't have anywhere for them to graze anymore and we have far fewer livestock too.
These are also cases where the state's strategy of involving private entities involves asking them to take over a private area from the state.
For example, that is the case with Fazao park in Togo, which is entrusted to a private Swiss foundation.
It also happened in Central Africa, where certain parks in DRC, like Garamba or Virunga, which are also entrusted to be managed by certain NGOs.
The results are proportionate with the level of investments from these partners and these investments usually vary from one site to another.
At the other extreme, it can be regarded as an abandonment or a total transfer of land rights by the state and the communities, which results in the complete privatization of the land.
And yet, land issues turn out to be a particularly sensitive topic, especially in the event they are occupied in the very long term, which is inkeeping with the spirit of conservation.
Furthermore, in the spirit of legislation, in Senegal or Kenya for example, fauna still belongs to the state.
Like we have already said, examples of this type of governance are quite rare in French-speaking Africa, due to the current law.
In any case, when they are governed by private entities, the territorial extension of protected areas is generally quite limited and they are not always governed very well.
You should know that private governance is developing unequally in Africa.
It is possible to find good examples of NGOs, companies and individuals, who are genuinely investing in conservation, just as it is possible to find bad examples of it with individuals with no principles, who loot public resources under the guise of conservation.
Of course, it all depends on the quality of the governance system and on the other actors' abilities -- especially the state's-- to ensure that the private actors are not free to make all the decisions.
Some of the decisions could be at the expense of conservation.
We need to remember not to criticize the model, because some individuals misrepresent it, but let's try to promote good practice.
Consider the protected areas governed privately that you know of and think about the promotor's motivation and how that finally influences the results for conservation.
There we go, that's the end of this lesson.
The next episode will be on protected areas governed by communities.
Have an excellent day.
