Welcome back to the course.
It is my pleasure to discuss today with Steffen Schaeffer.
He is a senior principal of mobility management at Siemens in Munich.
And maybe, Steffen, you can give us a little bit of your background.
Thank you, Matthias, for inviting me.
I'm glad to be here.
I have been working for 15 years now
on mobile internet and sensor network solution, what today is called the internet of things.
I've been at IBM for many years, and have been starting with the smart city solutions in 2010, when IBM launched the Smarter City campaign.
Three years ago I joined Siemens, and I'm now responsible for innovative digital mobility solutions.
Okay.
So you have a lot of experience and if you look 10 years ahead from now in which direction are the smart urban mobility systems going?
Even in 10 years from now, satisfying mobility needs for rapidly growing population in cities will remain one of the key issues in urban infrastructure management.
Of course, the privately owned cars we know it will still be around in 10 years.
But to a much lesser extent.
With the rise of self-driving vehicles, new mobility services, and the sharing economy, there will be significant change in urban mobility.
Modern information technologies, or what is called digitalization, are already enabling new transport modes, and are changing existing ones very rapidly.
We see examples in this in for example, free floating cars that are paid by the minute, and can be dropped anywhere.
The have become very popular in Germany and some US cities.
Bike sharing are normally used through apps and with information technologies.
Taxi apps or limo services have caused a lot of discussion and are challenging the existing taxi landscape.
As a last example,
Demand Responsive Transport (DRT), is now an interesting new mode that replaces the traditional shared hail service by leveraging today's technologies.
All of them are complementing existing public transport at least in the midterm.
With all these new transport modes, though, it will be important to make intermodal journeys seamless to the traveller, in the sense that it is easy to transition from one transport mode to the other.
For example, schedules are synchronized, or the information about when people arrive.
Ticketing schemes and payments are integrated.
And so forth.
Okay. Thank you.
Now how does automatization play into the evolution of smart urban mobility?
This is a great question.
Automation in mobility will certainly become a reality also in cities.
I personally can see two potential scenarios, and reality might well lie in between the two.
First scenario, public transport such as urban rail, underground or light rail trains, will remain the key transport mode in cities.
Basically forming transportation backbone.
Where such public transport infrastructure has been implemented it will stay and remain very efficient means of transport.
In complementing this first scenario there can be self-driving vehicles that will offer first and last mile transport in intermodal trips.
And thus complement and strengthen rail bound public transport.
In the second scenario self-driving vehicles may offer door to door services, at least within a city.
They could basically compete against mass-transit.
Due to self-driving capabilities, they wrote as a relatively inexpensive infrastructure, can be used intelligently, so that traffic jams are avoided.
Either way, self-driving vehicles will be more intensely used than today's cars.
They will be almost constantly on the roads for transporting passengers and goods, and if they need to park they will park themselves.
So as another effect less parking infrastructure will be needed.
So what are the main drivers toward smart urban mobility systems?
I see primarily technical and institutional drivers.
Let's start with the technical side.
Let's look at what is behind digitalization?
What does it mean for mobility in cities?
Let's look at the internet of things, for example.
In mobility, it means connected vehicles.
Maybe even, of course, cars and buses and so.
Maybe even bikes.
It could mean traffic lights that signal to cars the remaining red and green faces
Mobile internet and smartphones are another technology that are key drivers.
For example, people are able to locate themselves on the map and find mobility services around them, and purchase, for example, public transport tickets
 on the spot.
Thirdly, cloud plays an important role because now computing resources can be provided in a very flexible way.
For example, you can adapt the size of the computing resources to the traffic pattern.
That there will be more computing resources needed in morning and evening peak hours than during the night
And fourthly, artificial intelligence is a really important technology.
Because it is essential for self-driving cars.
And it can also help offer improving coordination of complex transportation networks.
And besides these information technologies, there are also technologies, other technologies that are changing better and cheaper batteries, for example.
And how about the institutional drivers?
Oh that is a really important point.
A suitable framework needs to be brought in place to make this all work.
And to fully utilize these new technologies by also keeping or creating a level plane field.
I can see more private mobility providers emerging beside the public transport operators, to a degree that citizens are offering rides, sharing their cars, similar to a public service.
And when Uber entered the market.
It gained a certain attraction and popularity amongst the citizens.
But the city governments and taxi companies first didn't know what to do with it.
But in the mean time now, national and city governments are bringing the right regulations in place so the new transport modes and these new services can be used.
Car sharing is another example.
Think how,
and under what circumstances should car sharing provider be allowed to park their fleet, which can be a few hundred cars in a city.
And what circumstances are they allowed to park their cars on public roads.
That is the framework that needs to be set up by the governments.
As another example in the US, we see an interesting trend that companies are trying to impact the mobility behavior of their employees.
They are charging parking fees, fees for parking the car at the corporate sites and take this money to subsidize alternative modes of transport for coming with your private car.
So there, you can see that in the absence of a good institutional framework of regulations, even private companies are going in this way.
And lastly, look at the two scenarios
I have painted before on the self-driving vehicles.
What is, ah, which scenarios will emerge in your city?
It's not a technical question.
And maybe also not a commercial one.
It strongly depends on the regulations you're setting.
Ya, I think that's a really
 clear conclusion.
The role of regulations in all of this.
Thank you so much, Steffen, for your insights on smart urban mobility systems.
It's been a real pleasure, Matthias, thanks for inviting me.
