Hi. In this video
Professor David Bresch from ETH-Z will talk about insurance and reinsurance in the context of disaster risk reduction.
So insurance, in essence, puts a price tag on risk.
It means it does bring risk transparencies so with that it helps people better understand the risk and it also helps them, obviously, to share some of that risk.
That's what the insurance market is all about.
Insurance therefore builds very strongly on the concept of trust, of mutual trust, of those who pay a premium now in order to be indemnified in case of a large catastrophe some time in the future.
Or if luck prevails, they never have to get compensated and that's why the premium is normally quite low compared to other means of dealing with natural catastrophes, especially compared to waiting until things happen and then try to sort it all out.
But honestly, insurance doesn't operate in a vacuum.
So if risks are too high, if they're too frequently happening people are not prepared at all and if the consequence of a catastrophe hitting a place is tremendous, insurance comes to its limits, obviously.
This price tag mechanism, in the sense that if prevention to a right level is in place then it lowers the price for insurance and at the same time then insurance is a very effective means to cope with the financial consequences of natural catastrophes, for example.
It does not help in other dimensions.
So it doesn't protect people from being affected.
It also doesn't protect directly their livelihoods.
It only helps them getting back on their feet after an event on the financial dimension of things.
And that's very important to keep that in mind and only see that insurance has a role to play but it doesn't play this role in isolation.
So insurance as a mechanism builds on the concept of insurability.
One I mentioned already-- there need to be many similarly exposed risks such that the law of large numbers is playing and the statistics are kind of performing in a sense that if you want to insure one single individual and nobody else it's much harder to figure how that exactly should all play out, than if thousands of people similarly exposed-- say, all of them exposed to some extent to hurricanes, tropical cyclone or cyclones depending on what part of the planet-- typhoons-- what part of the planet you are-- then you basically have that law of large numbers, which means it's easier to also assess risk.
So number two in reinsurance and insurance is the ability to quantify risk because otherwise it's very hard to figure what the premium might be and what the financial arrangement should look like in order to deal with that type of a catastrophe.
So number two is the assessibility of risk.
Can it be quantified?
Can there be ultimately put a price tag to things?
We use-- and we might come to that in a second-- a lot of models to determine this kind of the equation.
And then absolutely important, absolutely key for insurance is that the risk needs to happen by chance.
If the insured can influence the outcome, there's no alignment of interest, then you could basically insure with-- trigger, say, a fire, the building burns down, and he gets a cheap way to rebuild.
So you have to put measures in place such that neither the insured nor the insurer can influence the outcome or trigger the insured event.
And the last one is commercial liability, again, for both sides.
You can, in essence, insure things that happen more than once a year.
It's just very costly to do so.
And then the ability and the willingness to pay for the insured, those who are seeking insurance might be a bit limited, so frankly it's just commercially not attractive to do so.
And on the other hand, if people are not willing to pay anything for insurance then it's very hard to operate for the insurance company because they do need the commensurate means in order to pay claims.
There are different forms of insurance.
You can either insure things once they have happened, in a sense that you indemnify people for their damages.
Or you can also not directly compensate them for their loss or damage, you can also pre-arrange just an amount of money you're going to pay after an event.
You often have that in life insurance where there is, if there are calamities in life it's a lump sum you get if, say, somebody in your family dies.
And also in the natural catastrophe insurance there's what we call parametric insurance where you would say
"We measure the intensity of a storm and if that storm is a heavy storm you're entitled to so many dollars of compensation."
It's an easier arrangement, in a sense, you do not need to wait to adjust the damage, the claim, to the exact location and how it played out and people have to reconstruct.
In that sense, it pays more immediately.
Fast payment, easy in execution.
The problem is, it could also be you have bigger damage at your home than what you are entitled to receive.
So what we call basis risk-- the difference then between your amount you're entitled to get and your incurred damage.
And so that's an element in parametric insurance people should be aware of.
But often the speed to execution and the easy arrangements around that do play in favor of parametric insurance.
Not so much-- and then we come to to who gets insured-- not so much for the single individual because you, if you own only one home you very likely would like to get compensated to be able to rebuild.
And if then by chance, the hurricane wasn't that strong at your doorstep, and you get only half the compensation, in the parametric sense, that's not very much helping you.
But the more you, again, aggregate risk, say, for a city, for a region, for a country, a parametric cover is an extremely powerful tool.
That's what we've done especially in the Caribbean, since, I think, 2009, with the Caribbean
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, there's a mechanism which compensates 16 states against hurricanes, all on a parametric basis.
So the hurricane hits the place, scientists and the meteorological organizations measure the intensity of the event and a couple of weeks after the payment is made to the government's balance sheet.
And in that sense, it is a very fast track mechanism to get post-disaster finance which are on pre-arranged terms or pre-agreed terms.
A single individual on the ground normally seeks insurance from a local insurance company.
And the local insurance company therefore insures thousands of people, say, in a region, in a country, in a city.
Now if that particular city or region is hit by a large catastrophe be it an earthquake, be it a hurricane, a large scale flood, many of these risks will be hit at the same time by the same event.
So that insurance company has to pay a lot of claims at the same time and that will very likely stress the balance sheet of the insurance company or even exceed its capacity to deal with such kind of an event.
And that's why insurance companies do reinsure themselves with even larger reinsurance companies who operate on a global scale.
So while one city might be affected by, say, a strong hurricane, all the other thousands of cities in a portfolio of that reinsurance company, are not affected.
And therefore a reinsurance company does diversify risk of an insurance company and provides an insurance company with capital at much lowered cost than what they have to borrow locally as even the borrowers will be in stress if something is happening.
So in that sense, insurance and reinsurance play together to absorb larger quantities of natural catastrophe risk.
In many places on the planet, also the boundary conditions, special legal certainty is not so much there.
So people are not so sure, this game of trust where they would pay premium over years they would ever get something back.
Insurance is not the first option.
It's really awareness, early warning systems, that's where you make the huge difference and that's where you'll save the lives firsthand.
But once you've done that it's absolutely reasonable to think about city planning, regional planning and how you play with all these different constituencies to better help them perform better, so to say, in the next catastrophe.
And only once these elements are in place then mechanisms-- be it micro or macro insurance-- can make a difference.
And that's what we're then also working on to figure what kind of arrangements would now help people, first, getting better at managing risk themselves, and then second, allowing them to share the remaining part of risk with other communities, first within the country but then also across the border.
