Welcome to this class. 
Today we will talk about shared governance of protected areas, which concerns a type of governance in which many actors share the responsability of the land.
For further information, once again, please refer to the World Commission on Protected Areas guidelines.
In particular, chapter 3 shows different possible patterns of shared governance, and provides interesting case studies.
Also please refer to the 88th edition of the
NAPA letters, which summarizes a study that we have conducted in Africa on the matter very recently, and that you can download, as usual on papaco.org.
It is important to stress that shared governance cannot be decreed: no convention or rule enforces it, however some situations can obviously favour it.
Shared governance relies on a few principles, for example, a necessary equity between the parties involved in decision-making.
Paul will explain that to us.
The equity principle is essential for shared governance to develop, but it remains difficult to respect, because governance in itself is based on relationships between actors that do not perform the same functions although their functions may be complementary.
The existence of relationships suggests mutual trust, which needs to be built and maintained over the long term between the actors who end up being forced partners.
A big part of the problem in the setting up of shared governance actually lies at that level.
We will discuss equity in detail, especially its different types, in module seven.
We have observed in the previous sequences, which were about different types of governance, that the different parties involved played different roles.
Three roles are crucial here.
First, there's authority, which is generally enforced by the State.
The State ensures that commitments are kept.
Decentralization policies in Africa have strongly reduced this role to the benefit of other kinds of stakeholders, as we have observed with community governance, in the previous sequence.
Their second role involves mediation, which is no individual stakeholder's prerogative.
Yet, communities that claim they have unextinguished rights on some lands devoted to conservation play a crucial part in the process that leads to establishing a lasting agreement.
The last role is that of participation; private stakeholders participating in the governance of protected areas.
The financial resources, the private sector's technical skills give them the ability to intervene.
This must however be regulated by a legitimate authority, and benefit from intercommunity mediation.
To put it simply, very simply, there are two major types within this shared governance, that represent a bigger or lesser involvement in the collaboration between the different parties, once again, a continuum.
Generally, there are two scenarios.
In the first situation, where collaborative management is used, the State and the communities are bound through a brief or a management contract.
The communities, in this case, are responsible for planning activities and for implementing them.
However, annually, they are to produce a report that they must share with all the other actors.
Besides, still in the same scenario, it is the communities that decide how to manage the resources extracted from the protected area, which means that they are also expected to inform the other partners of how the resources, originating from the protected area, are being managed.
In the second situation, we talk about joint management.
Here, the state and communities are not bound by a contract or a brief.
But there is a statutory authority that is accepted and acknowledged by all, through which the stakeholders will be able to plan and implement activities.
And they will also specify, through this meeting, each actor's role in implementing activities.
It is also during this statutory meeting that the stakeholders will decide how to share the profits from the protected area.
Shared governance thus comes out as an exercise based on equilibrium, and in most protected areas where they have attempted to implement shared governance difficulties have come up, which took time to solve.
The transfer of responsibility thus remains a thorny subject.
Let's listen to Arsène, who will share a good example from Burkina Faso.
To illustrate the aforementioned concept of shared governance, we can use the example of the Mare aux Hippopotames Biosphere Reserve, located at about 60km from Bobo, in Burkina Faso.
It is a special Ramsar site because of the diversity of its flora and its fauna but also because because of the fact that many of its species are endangered.
Fishing seems to be the only activity currently authorized within that reserve, and it is an important activity, in terms of food security and income that benefits the communities.
Regarding the actors that are involved in this initiative, two are identifiable.
First, the State, through OFINAP, which is the National Office of Protected
Areas; it's the national body in charge of the implementation of territorial policies regarding protected areas.
But on the other hand, we also have the AGEREF, which is the Intervillage Association for the Management of Natural Resources and
Fauna.
It is comprised of communities from ten villages bordering the reserve.
The relationship between these two stakeholders is much more like a joined management system.
Indeed, the State, through OFINAP, sends representatives to the association's general assemblies, during which the future directions, in terms of protected areas management are defined.
Now, to take on the matter of the benefits for the communities from their involvement with managing and governing this protected area, there are two things that stand out.
The benefits can appear at an institutional level.
Thus, currently, AGEREF is involved with the protected area's management and governance dynamics.
It is therefore a good example of shared governance.
Even more than that, we hope, given the current dynamics, if there was a concession, that AGEREF could be the first stakeholder to step up to insure the good management of this natural resource.
Benefits are also identified by and listed under their socio-economical aspect.
Indeed, we can already notice that many jobs have been created which is linked to the presence of this biosphere reserve.
They include, among others, eco-guards who protected the villages, tourist guides and camp managers.
All of these are jobs are created in the communities that live on the fringes of that reserve.
Another point relative to socio-economical development is the generation of additional income in favor of the communities.
Indeed, these earnings originate from the ecotourism activity, through, notably, an entrance fee to the reserve, an increase in the value of non-timber forest products, an increase in the value of fishing products.
So all these activities revolving around ecotourism enable income to be generated, which is redistributed according to an allocation formula between the various stakeholders involved in the initiative.
We will now discuss the problems met by the association.
They appear here on many levels too.
First, we can bring up the association's limited power, or ecoguards' struggle when faced with poachers.
Indeed, arresting poachers is the State's forestry services' prerogative, which, by nature, may reduce, sometimes, the association's ability to be effective in its efforts to fight against poaching.
Another challenge that exists and that deserves a deeper thought process in order to solve it, is, oftentimes, the tense relationship between the association's tech teams and some members of the communities, who sometimes express very important needs in terms of exploiting natural resources, which often do not allow for those resources to last.
It is therefore necessary to keep thinking about those matters of conservation so that these initiatives take into account, just as much, the preservation of these resources, while allowing the neighboring communities to live from these resources next to their territory.
Finally, we can bring up a point regarding the fact that, currently, the AGEREF has no official document that underpins its involvement in the management and governance of this protected area.
We hope that, with the concession, which, when it is implemented, will allow the creation of a document which could be signed by the many stakeholders, a document in which each party's obligations would be specified.
Such a document would enable, indeed, a better management of the association's intervention in the biosphere's reserve.
Shared governance remains a constant objective, because its conquest is also permanent, any asset remains fragile because of interests prone to evolving.
This is why the stakeholders must keep their dialogue systems efficient, they must function according to each party's interest, and with, always, in mind the preservation of what we have gained from conservation.
It is a real challenge, because it demands habit-breaking, for reticence, incomprehension and fears to be overcome.
However, sharing governance is a vital way to help protected areas to evolve towards fairer, more sustainable mechanics, that guarantee more solid results in the long term.
Yet we know that it will be hard, especially for certain State structures to go beyond their own interest, in order to be open to encouraging prospects, but that are often off-putting for people unprepared for this kind of work.
Another aspect to consider is the cost of implementing such a governance system.
It can sometimes be very expensive, in terms of effort to gather a panel of stakeholders to make decisions, and, in the end, this will turn out to be crippling.
Because even if shared governance can seem desirable, it is not always possible everywhere, or at any given time.
There, I couldn't have said it better.
Thank you Paul for all these elements.
This is the end of the class, in the next episode, we will talk about the Nagoya Protocol and we will find another Paul.
Have an excellent day.
Partnership between André Hoffmann, Ecole
Polythechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
IUCN (France-IUCN partnership)
This MOOC is an academic collaboration between the following institutions:
Produced through the RESCIF framework and from the EPFL MOOCS for Africa initiative.
