In this week, the second week of looking at technologies, we covered the disinfection processes including heat, ultraviolet radiation and chemical disinfection in particular with chlorine.
We also looked at safe storage and combined systems.
For heat disinfection we started with boiling, the most commonly used household water treatment practice in the world, which is simply bringing the water to 100 degrees if you're at sea level.
And we also looked at pasteurization which inactivates pathogens at lower temperatures around 70 degrees.
And we showed that both boiling and pasteurization.
Are effective against all classes of pathogens and also are unaffected by turbidity.
We learned, what ultra violet radiation is and what effects it has on microbes and looked at the differences between UV-C.
Which is used in UV applications with lamps and UV-A and a bit of
UV-B which are involved in solar disinfection using natural solar radiation and plastic bottles.
We also looked at examples of both of
UV-C application and show SODIS in developing countries.
Next, we looked at chemical disinfection focusing on chlorination.
We reviewed briefly chlorine chemistry, the different ways that chlorine can be generated or obtained, and applied in liquids or tablet forms for household treatment.
We discussed how chlorine has variable effectiveness for different classes of pathogens.
It's especially effective against bacteria such as, E. coli.
And we looked at the safe water system developed by CDC and PAHO which includes a disinfection step along with safe storage and behavior change communication.
And here you see some examples of the safe water system being applied.
We considered the need for safe storage, regardless of what kind of treatment step is applied.
And looked at the desired characteristics of a good safe storage container.
We showed you several different examples of such containers.
And referred to two intervention studies that looked at the impacts of providing safe storage containers on household water quality in two different settings.
Finally, after reviewing all of these different processes from sedimentation and filtration to disinfection, individually, we reminded ourselves that it's important to have multiple barriers to prevent contamination of water quality.
This is done at a municipal or community scale, but can also be done at household scale.
Through informal combinations, such as this one here, or commercial formulations, especially the combination of coagulation and chlorination or filtration and chlorination.
Well we've come to the end of the section of the course that focuses on technologies.
We've reviewed the various household water treatment technologies from sedimentation and filtration through different kinds of disinfection and on to safe storage.
We've discussed the effectiveness of these different steps against different kinds of pathogens and given advantages and challenges of each of these treatment processes.
Illustrated with real examples from the field.
Well, the technologies are actually the easy part.
It's not all that difficult, actually to come up with something that will kill pathogens.
What's much more difficult is to get that system rolled out, adopted, taken up in the field, and used effectively and sustainability to provide safe drinking water at the household level.
So that's the subject of the remainder of the course.
And we'll start next week by looking at different implementation strategies.
