Hello and welcome everyone!
Today's lesson is dedicated to the Nagoya
Protocol on access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization in relation to the Convention on Biological
Diversity.
We will go over: an introduction to the protocol, the importance of genetic resources, access to and sharing of benefits, which are called ABS in English, the benefits and the scope of the protocol, the mechanics and the link between ABS and protected areas.
You can consult the website of the Convention on Biological Diversity for more detail on the subject.
What is the Nagoya Protocol?
It is an international treaty, which follows on from and affirms the Convention on Biological Diversity, notably, one of its three objectives: the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources.
It is an historic agreement on the international governance of biodiversity, relevant to different commercial and non-commercial sectors, dealing with genetic resources.
It is based on the fundamental principles of prior informed consent and mutually agreed terms conferred by the Convention on Biological
Diversity.
This came into force on 12 October 2014, after the ratification of the protocol by
12 countries.
Why the Nagoya Protocol is important: it provides a greater legal certainty and more transparency for providers and users of genetic resources.
It helps to ensure benefit-sharing, particularly when genetic resources leave the supplying country.
It establishes conditions for access to genetic resources that are more predictable.
What are genetic resources?
All living organisms: plants, animals, and microbes are carriers of genetic material which could be useful to humans.
These resources can originate from wildlife and domesticated animals, and wild and cultivated plants.
You can find them in environments where they flourish naturally, that's an in-situ case, in collections of human origin, it's an ex-situ case, for example: botanical gardens, gene banks, or seed pools or collections of microbial culture.
The importance of genetic resources.
Genetic resources are important because they represent a crucial source of information to better understand the natural world.
They can be used to develop products and services for human use.
The access mode to genetic resources and sharing of benefits, arising from their usage can create incentives for conservation and sustainable utilization of biodiversity, the creation of a fairer and more equitable economy.
Access and benefit sharing: it is done in a way that is possible to give access to genetic resources.
It is also done in a way that the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources can be shared between people and countries using the resources, called "users", and between the people and countries, which make them available, called "providers".
The benefit of the Nagoya Protocol: it encourages the furthering of research on genetic research which could lead to new discoveries.
It offers incentives to preserve and use genetic resources in a sustainable way.
It increases the contribution of biodiversity to human well-being and development.
The scope and central aspects of the Nagoya
Protocol: it applies to genetic resources, to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, and benefits arising from their utilization.
Its central aspects are: access, benefit-sharing, compliance, and traditional knowledge.
The mechanics: the ABS is based on prior informed consent given by a provider to a user.
Negotiations between the parties regarding development, and mutually agreed terms, with the aim of ensuring fair and equitable sharing of genetic resources and its associated benefits.
This makes reference to the way access to genetic resources is obtained and the way the users and providers come to an agreement on sharing benefits arising from their utilization.
Users wish to have access to genetic resources for the purposes of: firstly, scientific research, for example taxonomy, secondly, development of commercial products, for example medication.
The providers of genetic resources allow access in exchange for an equitable share of the benefits arising from their utilization.
The link between protected areas and ABS: protected areas and ABS have the common aim of biodiversity conservation.
The Nagoya Protocol is legally binding, therefore, it is a strong opportunity for protected areas.
Protected areas can benefit from research and bioprospection.
Protected areas are the hub, which connects community, conservation, and traditional use of biodiversity.
ABS can contribute to conservation and sustainable use.
Protected areas and ABS are two frameworks that address the common challenges of governance.
The benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources can be monetary, when research and development lead to the commercialization of a product, an example being the royalties or state payments, non monetary, for example, technology transfer, skill improvement in terms of research.
ABS can contribute to sustainable development and the struggle against poverty.
An information kit in relation to access to and sharing of benefits has been developed to raise public awareness.
This kit is available on the website of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
This is the end of this lesson.
The next episode will be an overview of the governance of protected areas.
Meanwhile, have a good day!
