Governance is the process of decision-making relating to managing protected areas, and not the actions of management themselves.
It concerns therefore who makes the decisions and how they are taken.
This is a fundamental notion to understand the strengths and weaknesses of protected areas. we can roughly identify four types of governance.
Governance by the government is the most frequent in Africa, and this is the case, where decisions are made by the government, whether at ministry level, or by an independent public body or a decentralized department.
In general, the state owns the area and it can choose to consult the other stakeholders when managing these protected areas, but ultimately, it is always the state who makes the decisions and takes responsibility for them.
Shared governance is when decision-making involves several parties, who all have responsibility for the final decision.
This sharing of responsibilities can go as far as complete delegation of protected area management by the state to a third party, such as a private entity, an NGO or a community.
But, most often, the state is reticent to delegate authority, even when it does not succeed in exercising that authority, and it continues to be the dominant party involved.
Private governance concerns the areas either controlled by, or whose property is maintained, by an individual, an NGO or a company whether it is for the purposes of profit or not.
In this case, the authority to manage protected areas and for their resources goes back to the owner who determines management goals, develops plans and retains control over decisions as long as they respect relevant legislation.
This is still a fairly rare form of governance in Africa, but it is now becoming more common.
Finally, governance by communities concerns protected areas where local residents are responsible for management, by means of various institutions, or by formal or informal customary rules.
In such a case, the area is under the control of the local community, who is responsible for reaching goals, even if the protected area is not recognized in a legal document.
By allowing the locals to be users and custodians of their own resources, we hope to generate more effective support for conservation of protected areas.
No matter who is in charge of governing the protected area, whether he is alone or he shares his mission with others, governance is based on the notion of responsibility.
Too few of the decision-makers in protected areas in Africa are accountable for the decisions that they make and on the way that they make them, and this greatly weakens management results on the field.
Evolving towards better governance of the conservation sector requires more responsibility and transparency by the relevant actors.
So let's now start the test on this module.
