Previously, we covered functional groups from source to treatment.
Today I would like to talk in more detail about the last two functional groups – distribution and transport as well as user safety.
We will get familiar with the water transport and distribution systems in a developmental and emergency context.
The user safety aspects will be considered only in regard to storage.
If you are interested to find out more about
HWT, refer to the Eawag`s MOOC on household water treatment and safe storage.
Transport of water in jerry cans is a reality for many rural and urban families.
Depending on the location of the water source, it requires often a lot of time which can be used for other activities.
In areas where water sources are located at longer distances, other water distribution options should be considered first.
Transport of jerry cans filled with safe water to home by water kiosk providers can be costly but in general adequate option in case water and jerry cans are disinfected and safely sealed.
Usually this is not the case and deterioration of water quality can be expected during transport and use.
Chlorination of jerry cans at the point of water collection can be an option to improve the situation.
Water vendors range from individuals who carry water in containers, pushcarts or bicycles, or deliver it in jerry cans with charts driven by animals or trucks.
Reselling of water can be either formal (water trucks managed by utilities or communities) or informal, such as individuals, buying water or fetching it at the source and carrying it to peoples home and reselling it at a higher price.
Water vendors often operate as an extension to public supply in urban areas performing the service to fill the gap between demand and supply.
In rural areas, high distance to water sources often is the driving force for water vendors.
Higher price then water at the network, water kiosk or borehole is often the drawback.
On this picture, water kiosk delivers water to households as a part of services.
Water tinkering is still used in remote rural settings without access to adequate water sources, urban and peri-urban areas without distribution networks or as an emergency water supply when other adequate water sources are not available.
In all cases – it is expensive, not easy to organize and should be avoided whenever possible.
If water is not chlorinated, water quality is likely to deteriorate during transport.
And tinkering of water from contaminated water sources can support spreading of diseases in large areas within a very short time.
Thus chlorination of tinkered water as well as shock chlorination of the tankers in times of disease outbreaks is highly recommended.
It helps that known volume and water source as well as mixing during transport make chlorination of tinkered water rather easy.
Water distribution systems transport water from the water source or water treatment plant to the point where it is delivered or used, such as community standpipe, yard connection or household connection.
It is the most desired and convenient way of delivering water to consumers.
It is also usually a safer way as contamination is likely to be lower than in case of transporting water by a jerry can or a truck.
Water demand in community distribution systems varies during the day.
Water consumption is highest during the hours it is used for personal hygiene, washing and cooking and is lowest at night.
These variations need to be addressed by water storage or pump control mechanisms.
In small community water supplies, the option with the storage reservoir is preferred especially considering that electric power or diesel supply is usually unreliable.
Storage reservoirs accumulate water during nighttime or when energy is available and supply it during peak water demand hours.
The pressure of at least 5-10 m of water column is needed to protect water in the network from ingress of polluted seepage water and assure sufficient pressure in the taps.
Intermittent supply leads to deterioration of water quality as well.
There are two types of community distribution networks: branched network consisting of one or few mains which separate in a number of dead-end connections and looped or "grid" configuration which consists of one or few main loops (rings) from which water is conveyed to secondary loops or branches.
Branched networks and simple to design and easier to install than looped networks.
Looped networks require number of interconnecting pipes, valves and special parts, and are more complex and expensive than branched networks.
Looped networks improve the hydraulics of the system and are generally more reliable: water can be supplied from different directions which can be important when one of the loops needs to be maintained, pressure variations are reduced and accumulation of sediments and risk of microbial contamination due to stagnation of water are reduced.
Large scale distribution is basically a very complex looped or mixed network.
They should be designed, and constructed in a way that dead-ends are eliminated or designed in a way that flushing is possible, prevent cross-connections, prevent unauthorized access, allow adequate disinfection and ensure that water system capacity is sufficient to meet domestic demand and other users, connected to the network such as enterprises, public organizations, fire protection, etc.
The planning, design and construction requires high level of expertise, especially when multi-source systems are needed and requires huge investments.
Rehabilitation of a large scale distribution network is complex but is being done more and more often also in emergencies as conflicts frequently affect urban areas and are becoming more often protracted….
Nearly 80-85 % of costs of water supply of a city is used in the distribution network.
Water consumption at households connected to a centralized water system with multiple taps and often a flush toilet varies between
100 and 400 Liters per person per day and is considerably higher than households collecting water at public taps, wells or other decentralized sources without household connection.
This leads also to a considerably higher water wastage.
Supply breakdowns and interruptions are common problems usually leading to recontamination due to zero or negative pressure and depletion of chlorine to 0.
People with intermittent supply tend to store water at home in containers, which are not necessary safe.
Water storage tanks are meant to ensure that sufficient reserve of water is available when needed.
Usually storage tanks are installed as a part of a water supply system to cover for breakdowns in water supply, balance peak demand, ensure adequate supply of water treatment processes or maintain pressure in the distribution system.
Water storage packs - circular tanks built from corrugated iron sheets in which synthetic rubber liner is hung as you can see on the picture or flexible collapsible tanks are often used to store water in emergency settings.
Water storage is also used at the user level – at home.
Larger storage water containers are often used by households relying on tankers or intermittent water supply.
Smaller storage containers are placed in or around households to store water carried from the source, or collected through small rainwater harvesting system.
The best water treatment and supply system can not prevent health risk if water stored at home becomes contaminated.
Taps to reduce contact of water with hands as well as lids help to reduce negative effects in small household tanks.
Appropriate design and lids, as well as periodic cleaning or disinfection are required for larger household water storage installations.
If water is of bad quality or has been contaminated during transport, House Water Treatment might be an option.
Eawag`s MOOC on House Water Treatment covers this in detail and we do not discuss this further.
So, to sum up, during this lecture we have discussed different distribution and storage options.
One of the options is transporting water in jerry cans.
This might not be most preferred option by it is very common.
Re-Contamination of jerry cans during transport and storage is a large problem, which might be addressed with chlorination.
In areas without distribution networks and reliable groundwater sources, water tinkering is used.
It should however be considered as only an intermediate solution or an immediate short term measure in an emergency and avoided whenever possible.
Distribution networks are most convenient ways of transporting water to consumers.
These are complex systems requiring lots of engineering, management and high investments.
Water consumption and wastage are considerably higher.
However, rehabilitation of the complex distribution networks is more and more frequently needed also in an emergency as the conflicts are getting more urban and protracted.
