We have seen that by the Arbitrage pricing theory the bond price processes discounted by the savings account are martingales under the risk neutral measure.
In this part we will now learn that if we discount bond price processes by a specific T bond, then this will give us martingales again but under some equivalent measure, that is called the T-forward measure.
This change of numeraire technique proves most useful for option pricing with stochastic interest rates.
As an application, we will derive closed form formulas for options on bonds in the Gaussian
HJM model and framework.
As a setup we consider a filtered probability space with risk neutral measure Q which is equivalent 
 to the real world measure P.
On this stochastic basis we're given a short rate process and the T-bond price processes which are given by the arbitrage pricing theory in this form. such that the T-bond price process discounted by the savings account is a martingale under the risk neutral measure Q as becomes evident here.
Moreover this martingale is strictly positive so that after normalizing it we can use it as a candidate for a Radon Nikodyn density process for an equivalent measure.
We call this measure the T-forward measure denoted by Q index T.
It is equivalent to Q with a Radon-Nikodyn density process given by the normalised 
T-bond price process discounted by the savings account.
Normalising means that this martingale in expectation is equal to 1.
The T-forward measure is defined on a time horizon T.
At this terminal time, the density is simply given by the reciprocal of the savings account time the normalising factor.
Here is an important application in derivatives pricing.
Consider a claim that is due at time capital T but suppose the pay off is given by X.
The price at time small t is given by discounting the payoff X with the savings account and take the conditional expectation under the risk neutral measure Q.
The difficulty for computing this expectation comes from the fact that the argument is product of the discount factor times X
Using the T-forward measure we can re-express this expectation of the product of the discount factor times X as expectation of X only
The expectation is taken under the T-forward measure and the expectation has to be normalised by the prevailing price of the T-bond.
To equate these two sides the Q conditional expectation and the QT conditional expectation of X we use base rule as shown here.
Here is a fundamental property of the forward measures.
For any time points T nought and T1, the T nought bond price process discounted by the T1 bond is a martingale under the T1 forward measure.
Strictly speaking this martingale is only defined up to the time which this is given by the minimum of T nought and T1.
Again, this claim can be proved using Bayes' rule as shown on this line here.
As a consequence the simple forward rate for the  future interval T-nought T1 follows a martingale under the T1 forward measure.
This follows from the relation between this forward rate and the ratio of the T nought bond price divided by the T1 bond price.
Because it is a martingale, it can be written as a conditional expectation of it's terminal value
at time T nought which is simply the future simple spot rate.
We can say more in a specific model.
So let us consider the HJM model framework where the T-forward rate dynamics under the risk neutral measure Q is given as shown here.
This is simply rewriting the HJM model drift as we have seen it previously.
Using the bond return volatility V which is defined as as minus the integral of the forward rate volatility Sigma.
In such a Heath-Jarrow Morton model, we have also seen that the discounted bond price process can be written as stochastic exponential as shown here.
So we're given an explicit expression for the Radon Nikodyn density process of the T-forward measure in terms of the Brownian motion W* under the risk neutral measure Q.
We can then apply Girsanov theorem that implies that under the T-forward measure the process that we call 
W upper index capital T which is defined as shown here is a Brownian motion.
It then follows immediately from this representation of the T-forward dynamics that the T-forward rate process is a martingale under the T-forward measure and there's a consequence.
It can be written as conditional expectation of it's terminal value which is just the future short rate at time capital T.
Now let us look at the most basic option in the bond market.
It is a European call option on the T1 bond with expiry date T nought and strike price K.
This option gives the holder the right to buy a T1 bond at the expiry date T nought for the price K.
The holder of the option will exercise the option only if the T1 bond price at expiry date T nought is not greater than K.
As a consequence the  payoff to the holder of the European call option is given by the positive part of the difference of the T1 bond price
We obtain the price of this call option at the time 0 by discounting the payoff with the savings account and take the expectation under the risk neutral measure.
We could compute this price for any time small t prior to T nought but for simplicity of notation we concentrate here on the spot date 0.
We see again that the difficulty for computing this option price, comes from the fact that the argument in the expression operator is the product of the discount factor times the payoff which is a random variable which is measurable with respect to FT nought.
We could have seen on the previous slide get rate of the discount factor by rewriting this expectation as an expectation under the T nought forward measure but we will do something smarter here.
We denote in blue here the exercise event of the call option that is the centrefold states where the holder of the call option will exercise the option.
This is exactly when the T1 bond price is greater than the strike price K.
We can then decompose the payoff of the call option into the difference of the T1 bond price times the indicator function of the exercise event minus the strike price times the indicator function of the exercise event.
We then use the linearity of the expectation operator and can write the call price as the difference of the expectations of the respective components.
We then change to the T nought forward measure for the second expectation to get rid of the discount factor as shown here and we end up with the expectation of the indicator function of the exercise event under the T nought forward measure which is  simply the same as the probability of the exercise event under the T nought forward measure.
In the first expectation, we observe that this factor that I underline here, after normalisation with the initial T1 bond price, is the same as the Radon Nikodyn density of the T1 forward measure conditional on T nought. 
This is just what we need to apply base rule again and re-express this first expectation now as expectation of the indicator function of the exercise event under the T1 forward measure which is nothing else than the probability of the exercise event under the T1 forward measure.
As a result we summarise that the call option price of a T1 bond at expiry date
T nought, can be expressed in terms of the probability of the exercise event under the T1 forward measure and the T nought forward measure.
So in order to find a closed form formula, we have to formulate the model for which we can compute these two probabilities in closed form.
And this will be the case in particular for
Gaussian Heath-Jarrow-Morton models.
As an intermediary step, we observe that the probability of the exercise event under the T1 forward measure, can be rewritten as probability of an event that is expressed in terms of the T nought bond price discounted by the T1 bond price.
Similarly, the probability of the exercise event under the T nought forward measure can be rewritten as probability under the T nought forward measure of an event expressed in terms of the T1 bond price divided by the T nought bond.
This is a useful observation because we know that bond price processes discounted by the T1 bond are martingales under the T1 forward measure and similarly for T nought, bond price processes discounted by the T nought bond are martingales under the T nought forward measure.
That means in both cases
we have here the terminal value of a martingale under the respective forward measures.
In the Heath-Jarrow-Morton framework we can even  write down how these martingale look like.
The T nought bond price process discounted by the T1 bond can be written explicitly as a stochastic exponential of a stochastic integral with respect to the  Brownian motion under the T1 forward measure.
And this holds interchangeably for T nought and T1.
Now in view  of these two identities, it should be clear that when the volatility is a deterministic function the stochastic exponential is a log normal, random variable.
We can compute it's mean and it's variance and so we  will be able to compute this probability in closed form.
And similarly interchangeably 
T nought T1 we will be able to compute this probability and here are the details.
Assume that the volatility Sigma is a deterministic function and so consequently the bond return volatility is also a deterministic function, we can go back to the stochastic exponential shown on the previous slide and take the logarithm which gives us this identity as shown here.
Because V is a deterministic function, we know that what we have on the right hand side is a Gaussian process.
The mean function is given as shown here and the variance function is given as shown here.
Setting small t equal to T nought and combining this insight with the previous slide, we arrive at the following theory.
In a Gaussian Heath-Jarrow-Morton model, that is a Heath-Jarrow-Morton model with deterministic volatility function Sigma the time 0 price on a European call option on a T1 bond with expiry date 
T nought and strike price K is given by the difference of the T1 bond price times the probability of the exercise event under T1 forward measure minus strike K times the T nought bond price times the probability of the exercise event under the T nought forward measure.
These two probabilities can be written as standard cumulative distribution function Phi evaluated at D1 and D2 respectively where these numbers are given by the expression shown here.
This is a closed form formula for the price of a European call option on a bond.
From it we can easily now infer a price formula for a European put option on a bond as shown in the following.
The put call parity relates call prices to put prices in a one to one relation.
It derives from this elementary identity.
Here is the payoff
of a call option and that is the payoff of a put option with the same strike K.
By linearity of the prices, we infer that the difference of the call price minus the put option price is given by the present value of what we have here on the right hand side which is simply the T1 bond price at time 0 minus K times the T nought bond price at time 0.
We can solve the put call parity for the put option price and plug in the call option price from the previous slide to derive that the put option price in the above
Gaussian Heath-Jarrow-Morton model is given by the expression here.
From the put call parity we also see that the put option price is equal to the call option price for a specific strike price K given by the T1 bond price divided by the T nought bond the strike price is called the at the money strike price.
As an example let's look at a specific
Gaussian Heath-Jarrow-Morton model the Vasicek short rate model.
We already know that the forward rate volatility function is given as shown here.
We can then explicitly compute the difference between the volatility fn the return on the T nought bond minus the volatility of the return on the T1 bond as shown here such that the integrated square difference of these volatilities is given as shown here.
This is one ingredient of the Gaussian HJM model call option price formula
The other ingredient is the initial discount curve.
We thus obtain an explicit closed form bond option price formula in the Vasicek short rate model.
For an illustration we choose the parameters as shown here
For these parameters we compute the put option prices on the Ti bond with expiry date 
Ti minus 1 and the at the money strike price Ki which is given by the ratio of the Ti bond price divided by the Ti bond price.
We do this for a sequence of expiry dates and bond maturities going from one quarter of a year up to 10 years.
We obtain a term structure of put option prices as shown in this graph here.
The scale on the Y-axis is in basis points.
This means the price of a put option on the one half year bond with the expiry date in 3 months, is slightly less than 4 bases points.
