In the previous module, we had introduced the notion of dimensionless number, the notion of invariant and what the purpose of the theory of similarity was. We will now see all these notions through a concrete example which is the motion of a pendulum, more precisely the motion of a point mass m which is connected to a rod of length l. We will see how the theory of similarity will clear the study of this classical problem of mechanics. We will study a problem where we have a point mass m connected to a rod of length l. The velocity of this point mass will be the length l multiplied by the point angular velocity θ. I can do a small simulation to show what is going on. We can see that if I change the length l, I will modify the energy of my system, the potential energy, the kinetic energy, the total energy.
If I change the mass, I will also vary these energies and I will also vary the frequency or the period of oscillations of the pendulum. The question that arises is to know how are connected all these parameters between them and can I have an idea of the solution without doing a detailed study of the mechanics. We will reason here in a way a bit reversed by starting from the equations of mechanics that we will solve and we will see how we could reason differently to obtain the same result. I start by a small reminder, we have seen that when we had a pendulum that is assumed without friction of the air, without mechanical friction, we have conservation the mechanical energy, so the kinetic energy and the potential energy. If I differentiate this equation with respect to time and that I simplify,
I obtain a differential equation non linear of second order in θ. What interests me is to manage to characterize the motion for example the oscillation period. What are the variables of the problem ? I have three variables : θ which is the position of the pendulum, the length of the pendulum which is fixed for a given experiment and the inclination angle of the pendulum depends on time. The scales of the problem are the following : I need a scale for the inclination of the pendulum, this scale will be for example the initial angle from which I will throw my pendulum. The length, naturally as it remains constant will be the length of the pendulum and the characteristic scale of time will be the period.
We have another variable that is constant here, which will be g, but we can also assume that if we are working on the moon or on Mars, the value of g could be changed. The question that arises is, under which conditions the equation of motion that we have seen previously is invariant if I do a change of units so if for example I go from a length l to a length l' and if I go from a time t to a time t'. Here I should have introduced a second variable name but to simplify
I assume that the ratio of time, this ratio here is λ at a certain power so in general the power a will be different than 1. If now I do the substitution of variable in my equation of motion so that I replace time by this expression here, and that I replace the length that appears here by the values that is here, I obtain this expression here. Wee see that if I take care in defining a as being 1/2, I will be able in the resulting equation here to make
λ disappear as here we have a  λ^2a =  λ, in this case here, if  λ = 1/2, the transformation of the initial equation will be strictly identical to the original equation and we will say that the equation is invariant by a the following variable change by taking a = 1/2 so it is a linear transformation but with axis that are not lengths but lengths and times. As a = 1/2, we can define the ratio of length  λ, it is also the square root of the ration t / t'. If I translate this in terms of my initial quantity scale so the oscillation period,  λ will be defined as being the square root of the oscillation period at a certain scale to another scale.
We see here that if I manage to measure what is happening for a given experiment which corresponds to a length and a given period, I can, without doing experiments, determine the oscillation period for another experiment which would correspond to another length l' as the equations are invariant and that this oscillation period will have to verify, by using this relation here, the following equation. The first contribution of the theory of similarity, will be to go from a scale to another without re-doing the experiment. Second contribution, it will be the non-dimensionalization of the equations and so the introduction of dimensionless numbers.
If for example here I introduce a dimensionless time as being my physical time divided by my time scale (the period), I can transform my equation, here in physical units in an equation that doesn't have physical dimensions, the angle is expressed in radian so does not have units and here I show a number, a ratio that call here Pi and if you look close enough, if you do the calculation of the physical units, g*T^2 / l, this ratio is dimensionless. Pi translates here a dimensionless number that will characterize the problem. The non-dimensionalization of the equation of motion allows to go from an equation that is expressed in physical variables, in physical units to an equation without dimensions of which the important parameter will be this dimensionless number, called here Pi and we always have an initial condition that will be
θ0. All the physics of the problem in fact will be resumed through this dimensionless number and this initial condition, which makes in particular that
Pi can only depend for a given experiment on θ0. If Pi depends only on 
θ0, I assume that there exists a relation here explicit where I express that Pi is a function of θ0, so I have here squared to be able to simplify afterwards.
If I use the definition seen previously of Pi, then, if I equalize these two expressions, it shows that the form of the oscillation period must be written under the form of square root of l /g multiplied by this initial function f(θ0) that we do not know. The important result here is that simply by manipulation of physical units we have managed to find the structure of the solution where we show that the oscillation period is written under this form here, multiplied by something that depends on the initial condition. In an extreme case, we can solve quite simply the equation of motion. When we work in small oscillations, we can do the approximation sinus of the angle is equal more or less to the angle. In this case here, the equation that we have seen previously is transformed in a linear equation of second order with two initial conditions, I assume that
I let go my pendulum at a certain angle
θ0 with no initial velocity and so it is an equation that we can solve quite simply, we obtain the following expression for the value of the angle. In this case here, what you manage to show is that the period that I call here θ0 that corresponds to what is happening when we are working at small oscillations, the period here will be equal 2*Pi*sqrt(l
/ g) we could do the calculation when we are working with arbitrary initial angles, so the calculation is done, it is a bit more complicated, remember only  that the solution, if we do the complete calculation, is written under this form here with the period corresponding to a given angle θ0 and we find the fact that was given by the theory of similarity that the oscillation period is written as sqrt( l/g) multiplied by a function of the initial angle, here it turns out that this function is a known function somewhat complex that is called a complete elliptical integral of the first kind.
Through this example a little fast but taken from classical mechanics, we have a certain number of lessons to pull out, the first lesson is that there are invariants that are dimensionless quantities and that are defined as combinations of variables that define the problem. We can simplify the study of a problem by proceeding in the non-dimensionalization of the equations, we have seen it with the equation of the pendulum, we can transform an equation expressed in physical units in an expression with no physical dimensions, which in general simplifies the problem. We can also define the conditions that can consider the phenomenon at different scales and from that point, to know how do we do to go from one scale to another. This transition from a scale to another is what we often call a criterion of similarity. We have seen for example in the case of the pendulum, the criterion of similarity is given by a dimensionless number which is Pi = constant. So for each experiment
Pi will be equal to a certain value and to go from one experiment to another it will suffice that
I use the constance of the parameter 
λ or the number Pi. The question that arises, here we saw that we  proceeded a little in reverse as we have started from the equations, we have fund mathematically the solutions and we have seen by reasoning what was conserved and what was not conserved, what could be simplified and what could not be simplified.
The question is how do we do to determine without solving equations, how do we do to determine the right criteria of similarity and their numbers
? We will start with the simplest, with the method of Rayleigh which is a method of verification of the homogeneity of a mathematical formula or a physical equation.
We assume that we have a quantity, a variable x that we are looking to express as a function of a number n of parameters that I call here yi. When I will introduce the brackets, like here, it means that I am working in physical units, for example if x is a velocity, here, what is between brackets are meters per second. Each variables that define my problem y1, y2, we will be able to express them in the fundamental physical units kg.m/s, what
I am trying to do is to know how must I multiply my variables of the problem from y1 to yn such that the product of the dimensions here correspond to the dimensions of x. In general it is a simple system of equations to solve that will lead to the result. We see it through an example very simple which is still the example of the pendulum. Let's admit that I am trying to calculate the oscillation period of the pendulum of length l and of mass m in a gravity field g. I have my three variables g, m, l and what I am trying to calculate is
T. By using the relation which is here,
I set that the oscillation period must be proportional to the length at a power a, the the mass at a power b and to the gravity at a power c. If now I write it under a dimensional form, so if I write here the units of the period, it will be seconds, the unit of length will be meters and the unit of mass, we will have kilos and the unit of gravity or the gravity acceleration, we will have m/s^2 and each of these variables are raised at the power a, b and c. What 
I stress is that here I must have in my system, if I now do a balance of the fundamental units, here, I must have seconds, so here I have 1, however the mass so the kg or the length will be two units that are missing so we will have 0 and 0, if I now do the balance of what is happening on the right, so the kg appear here at the power b and if I look at the length, so meters, the meters appear here and here, so the power at the power a and the power c. When 
I gather my different exponents, I must have that b = 0, a + c = 0 and 1 = -2c, when I easily solve this system,
I obtain that c must be equal to -1/2, a = 1/2 and b = 0, this shows that in this case here we must have the period that has to be proportional to sqrt(l/g). We have seen that it was this result here given previously when we solved entirely the equations of motion. We have seen an example relatively simple to verify the homogeneity of an equation and to find the structure of a solution. We will now see what is happening in a more formal way with the Vaschy-Buckingham theory called also Pi theorem.
