Ecological monitoring in this MOOC mainly deals with monitoring at the level of a protected area.
But there are plenty of other levels where monitoring can be implemented.
Sometimes, it doesn't involve the entire protected area.
It can be a specific system or targeted species that will lead to only monitoring the area in which these species exist.
For example, chimps
of the Niokolo Koba National Park in Senegal have undergone specific monitoring for a long time that usually only involved the forest blocks they are present in.
In other words, less than ten percent or fifteen percent of the parks' surface.
If the indicators are well-chosen, localized monitoring can, however, adequately inform on the state of the entire park because generally the conservation conditions are inherently linked and local success depends on overall protection.
Here is another example: monitoring the large carnivore is sometimes taken as an indicator of the overall state of the protected area's conservation as you mean that they are the highest level of the food chain.
This, however, is not always relevant.
Their number can decrease due to targeted persecution from the (INAUDIBLE) while the rest of the protected area is being preserved or they can prosper by feeding themselves on the periphery of the area while the antelopes of the park become scarcer.
So, in the long run, managing the ecosystem by focusing on only one species is not the most suitable solution.
By the way, managing a site, regardless to others
in the same network can give way to some shortcuts.
Indeed.
It is useful, if not essential, to share the methods and results with the other parks in the same network, like a national network for protected areas, for instance.
Or between protected area covering the same kind of ecosystem like marine areas or mountain areas.
Otherwise, within a site, you risk missing a trend visible at the level of the entire network.
For instance, marine protected areas should make sure the information obtained from monitoring is communicated from one area to the other.
This makes sense when you look at fish species or turtles that will move from one area to the other, obviously.
The specific case of transmonitoring protected areas is indicated.
Of course, these sites share the same natural resources and ecological monitoring should involve the entire ecosystem.
It is, however, rarely the case because of logistical, administrative, and even legal difficulties.
Thus, monitoring elephants in Pendjari National Park shows strong variation from one year to the other.
This doesn't mean an increase or decrease of the population, but simply the fact that according to the state of the environment, elephants may still or already be in neighboring areas of the W National Park, the other national park, and so on.
So the only way, then, to get a proper idea of the population's number would be by monitoring the entire territory shared by Burkina, Benin and Niger.
So, the question of monitoring beyond the borders of the protected area is, of course, relevant.
Many species are a value for a protected area but their distribution in space or in time extends far beyond the limits or the time when the monitoring takes place.
Adapting monitoring to the situation seems to be a necessity.
Monitoring the species can be done only when it is found within the protected area.
The risk is then that the conservation measures we will take will be disconnected from real challenges, challenges faced by the species when it is located somewhere else.
For instance, the elephant population in N'Gouma in Mali moves in a very vast area between several different waterholes.
Only counting animals that are around one pond or waterhole doesn't provide a genuine idea
 of the threats
faced by these elephants, nor does it give an idea of possible solutions regarding their conservation.
You can extend monitoring to all the areas visited by the species.
In other words, adapting it to specific moments in time when the species goes to every site.
This requires a strong collaboration between sites, countries or regions.
A good example of this is the water bird survey that takes place every year around mid-January in Europe, but also in Africa, to have a better idea of the species' population.
You can also choose to focus on the species, rather than the place, wherever it may be, which requires even better coordination.
Thus, many migrating bird species are monitored mainly thanks to colors or microchips because they move a lot and inconsistently from one year to another.
Localized monitoring wouldn't have any sense other than to provide local information to the manager.
You can also use tools that allow monitoring ecosystems as a whole on a very big scale.
It is a case of satellite images that give information on the health state of entire sections of the planet and to hope, to better understand what is happening locally by contextualizing the situation.
A good example would be the impact of climate change that can be hard to detect locally over a short period of time while there would be appearance on the long period of time or on a big surface.
For instance, the shrinking surface of the wetland or the coastline changes.
Finally, it is required to adapt ecological monitoring to the characteristic of the species or environments that you want to monitor, and to the challenges they face.
It is, therefore, not certain that all the answers regarding the management of the protected area can be found at the level of this protected area.
It will always be useful, anyway, to see what is done, as well, at other levels in order to know if the question you are asking yourself for your protected area wouldn't be better treated this way in other places?
