The Nazinga Game Range is located in the south of Burkina Faso two hundred kilometers from the capital city which is Ouagodougou.
The Nazinga covers around nine hundred square kilometers and these entirely are made of savanna.
The range's main management targets are the conservation of biodiversity and the valorisation of natural resources through hunting and tourism.
I mean, vision tourism.
Because of this, the park falls under the protected area of category six.
Population growth in the many surrounding villages is one of the greatest threats faced by the range.
This causes poaching, and creates the need for agricultural space which greatly impacts fauna and flora.
Despite this contraint, and with the aim of reaching all its targets in mind, the range has implemented a continuous ecological monitoring system of some values of the ecosystem.
So, in Nazinga, the climate is monitored to know the state of the environment and the factors that can affect it.
To give an example, making the right decision regarding bush fires ignition, including preferred date or time of fire to set, which are key elements in this savanna's ecosystem as it will help management to have knowledge on the influence of the quality of pasture available for the park herbivores who are also monitored and valued in the range.
Climatic factors are monitored through the weather station located in the range, as well as another station located in Po City, near the protected area.
And more recently, via another station set up by some program, research program, called WASCAL, which is studying climate changes in the area.
Monitoring water points is also considered when monitoring certain habitats.
This type of monitoring aims at controlling the presence of surface water over time to know its availability for the park's animal species, especially elephants, which are also one of the range's values
To do this, the water level progression of the main dams and water courses is assessed every season through direct observations.
If water runs out, the decision may be made to fill it up artificially to avoid animals dispersing outside the park.
The fauna dynamics are also monitored to set collection limits, especially when it comes to huntable species like roan antelopes, warthogs, waterbucks, etcetera.
After several tests, the line transects by walking on foot.
This is foot samplings on line-transect systems or method that was chosen for the site.
To get even more information on the diversity of species in the park, scientific results are also used, as well as data that is collected by tourists.
It is by this way that the range was able to complete the list of bird species that is already 290 as known, for example for the park.
Hunting enables the collection of species biometric data from killed animals, including weight, height, horn size, etcetera.
This gives information on the health conditions of the species, such as waterbuck or roan antelope, and indirectly, on the food availability inside the park over years.
In monitoring the anthropic pressures on different animal and plant values, listed until now, is essentially conducted through surveillance;
I mean, law enforcement.
This gives the possibility of specifically recording any form of harms done to the targeted species namely, signs of poaching, or wood cuttings and other types of collections.
Monitoring habitat and flora is enhanced by research activities that are focused on specific themes identified during the ecological monitoring processes.
They are mostly carried out by students or researchers in direct link with the park's staff and are coordinated by the park's manager.
One of Nazinga's main problems is related to elephants which are one of the monitored values of the protected area as they create conflict in the villages surrounding the park.
This threat is monitored by collecting information on the damages around the range which are systematically recorded and allow to understand elephant's population dynamics, as well as their moment and damage frequencies.
This will naturally help the management to implement suitable preventive measures.
In all ecological monitoring systems implemented in Nazinga enables the range managers to obtain both the qualitative and quantitative information that they need to carry out interannual comparison and to evaluate the shifting trends of the protected area values in terms of animals' numbers or habitat quality or even to understand anthropic pressures that face the range.
This is also always to evaluate and adjust management and valorisation decisions of natural resources inside the range, especially when it comes to hunting game.
This reaches a key value for the parks.
