Congratulations, you've completed Week 4.
Let us quickly look what we have covered in this week.
We looked at biological biowaste treatment options.
We looked at vermicomposting and processing with black solider flies.
We looked at thermochemical conversion of organic waste.
Then we also looked at hazardous and healthcare waste and concluded with e-waste.
In vermicomposting, we looked at the worm's cycle as a start.
Here shown in this picture.
Then we look to the environmental conditions suitable for vermicomposting, such as aeration, moisture, also the need to be shaded, and the daily feed rates of about
50% of worm weight per day.
We also looked at case studies and looked how this technology is constructed, such as the example here from the Philippines.
Then we looked at the products of vermicomposting, the vermicompost, the worm tea, and the worms themselves.
Then we looked at another approach of biowaste processing using blank soldier fly larvae.
First, we looked again at the life cycle of the insect.
Then on how to manage the colony and how to operate the treatment process.
Then we looked a the BSF products, the residue which is similar to vermicompost and the larvae, which have a high protein content of 40% and fat content of 30% and are a high value product, especially for animal feed.
In the module on healthcare waste management, we started off by looking at the waste amounts.
Remember only 15-20% is actually hazardous, the rest is typical municipal waste.
Segregation is a main priority.
Then we looked at how to enhance this source segregation, by color coding and the provision of containers, for instance, for sharps.
Then we looked at healthcare waste treatment options, mostly referring to this book,
The Compendium of Technologies for
Treatment and
Destruction of Healthcare Waste.
We looked at different systems, autoclaves, but also incineration and finally, ending with a special pits of landfilling.
In the module on thermochemical processes, we looked at the different options and they're different parameters, temperature, air and retention time.
But we also looked at the products from these processes and their quality.
After looking at the processes and the parameters, we also looked at the value chain.
Starting off with primary products through to conversion to finally the market, looking at different products of value, which we can sell in the market.
Then the module on e-waste, where we looked at the relevance of e-waste on a global scale but also the risks of e-waste recycling and how this can be improved.
Stay with us for an exciting fifth week, where we will be talking about strategic planning, benchmarking city performances, looking at waste and climate change, and also the issue of circular economy.