The Comoé National Park, or CNP, is located in the northeast of Cote d'Ivoire, and covers 1'149'000 hectares or over 2.8 million acres.
It is the largest protected area in west end Sub-Saharan Africa.
This park is representative of Cote d'Ivoire's savannah biomes.
It was classified
Biosphere Reserve in 1982, and World Heritage Site in 1983.
At the Comoé National Park pressures have increased during the long political and military crisis the country went through between 2002 and 2011.
These threats have caused resurges in gold mining, illegal transhumance and poaching, which led to the depletion of some animal species, such as chimpanzees, elephants and lions.
In 2010 and 2014, the return of social and political stability has allowed for 2 aerial sampling to take place in the Comoé National Park, with the technical support of Wild Chimpanzee Foundation (WCF), and the GTZ.
This study unit is based on the result of these 2 surveys, which were a form of surveys aiming at rediscovering the state of the park and its values, and to reorganize management based on the identified priorities.
Let's remember that surveillance is not the same thing as monitoring, and that it is based on a series of samplings repeated over time, providing baseline data for the later implementation of ecological monitoring.
The study area covers 16'703 km².
It is made of the Comoé National Park, and 2 biodiversity hotspots:
Warigué in the north and Mount Tingui in the south.
In 2010 and 2014, the data collection methodology consisted in systematically
[flying over] the study zones by sampling [transects lines] of different lanes. 
The sampling system included 45 transects tilted at 20° to the north, and led out regularly and systematically 6 km apart from each other.
In total, 2955 km of transects were overflown among which, 70% were located in the Comoé National Park.
The sampling rate of the surveyed zone was 6.21%.
In 2010, a total of 8477 direct mammal observations were made.
Among these with 90% of all individual scenes domestic animals, especially oxen, were the most encountered animals.
With 756 individuals, representing 8.92% of all observations, the second most prevalent species encountered were the wild bovine species, including hartebeests, buffalos, defasa waterbucks, kobs, bushbucks
[INAUDIBLE] antelopes and some duikers.
As for primates, two chimpanzees and 30 monkeys, among which were live baboons, patas and green monkeys were observed.
Two footprints of elephants and 36 individuals of other mammal species were also observed.
Also these special distribution maps show that the fauna was distributed unevenly throughout the park, and indicators of entropic activities were found in the park as well as on the outskirts.
With more than 6000 domestic animals observed in the Comoé National Park, during the 2010 survey was reduced 100 times in 2014 to around 60.
While the number of wild animals has increased 2 times, going from 752 to 1047 individuals.
Furthermore,
86.99% of domestic animals observed in the surveyed in the area, in 2010, were found within the Comoé National Park.
While in 2014, that number went down to 4.58%.
In both 2010 and 2014, the special distribution of bovine species covered almost the entire surveyed area.
But in 2014, the distribution of bovine observations over the entire park was less even.
However, that same year the maximal encounter rate,
8 individuals per kilometer, exceeded that of 2010, 
7 individuals per kilometer, where areas of high-encounter rates of bovine species were more isolated.
First, the chances of finding wild animals are higher in the central parts of Comoé National Park.
In 2010, rates of human activity encounters higher than 1 indicator per kilometer, were essentially found around the park, where more than 3 indicators per kilometer were observed in the entire area.
This is proof of a great entropic pressure.
In 2014, the encounter rate of these indicators decreased in the Comoé National Park going from 5 indicators per kilometer, to 2 indicators per kilometer.
Between 2010 and 2014, in the Comoé National Park, there was indeed a significant difference between the encounter rates of entropic activity indicators.
These aerial surveys give fundamental results on the state of the main species still present, which are potential protected area values, and of some of their attributes:
Where number, distribution, group composition, and threats they are facing.
Carrying out surveys on the same zones and in similar conditions, shows the shifting trends of the attributes at times where it is key to be able to closely monitor park management decisions in the context of the park's recovery.
Great conservation efforts are first being made by managers and the data collected shows the results thereof.
But monitoring and actions must continue; because entropic pressures on the Comoé National Park are still present.
Namely, in east peripheral zones.
This could have negative impacts on the balance of the Comoé National Park ecosystem.
