The elephant is one of the most studied species on the planet, and there are many techniques to monitor it.
But let's have a look at some of them that are useful to guide management decisions.
The first question the manager can ask himself is to know how the elephant are distributed in and around the protected area, so that he can detect abnormal movements caused by entropic pressures.
A common technique to determine the distribution of elephants consists in studying their tracks, either droppings or footprints, in transects spread over the entire protected area. 
Alternatively, sampling implications in space and time of these transects allow to get more reliable results of the real distribution of the elephants. 
As for the methods using telemetry or satellite monitoring, which consists in placing a tracking collar on certain key individuals to monitor their journeys the signals emitted by the collar are then received by an antenna or a satellite, that gives the animal's positioning.
So this system enables direct monitoring that can be useful when a quick management decision needs to be made, when elephants get closer to populated areas, for instance. 
Especially if those elephants know how to cross electrified fences, which draw the limit between the protected area and the neighboring communities.
They can then be spotted early enough to intervene on time, and prevent human-elephant conflicts.
On the other hand, knowing the damage rates done by elephants on certain
(INAUDIBLE) forests of the protected area, where they are present in high densities, will allow to intervene if this sensitive habitat needs to be protected.
Even if the cause-effect relationship between elephants and their habitat is often hard to establish, there are simple models though to predict them and that allow the manager to simulate the consequences of interventions, in order to assess the level of risk before implementing them.
Such models have been developed, for example, for Tsavo, Serengeti, and  Manyara ecosystems, in east Africa.
Thereby, to better manage these habitats and their threats, beyond knowing the distribution, the manager will also need to know the number of elephants present in the protected area and their density.
And even the possible evolution of the resident population over the years.
If the protected area is in the savannah you could, for example, proceed to aerial or ground based censuses, by counting the elephants on transects.
On this map we see that the aerial count, done in 2008, over the Laikipia and some rural areas in Kenya, have allowed to identify the zone with the different densities of elephants.
In the protected areas located in the dense forests in Central Africa, we stick to ground-based censuses.
Or we use capture-recapture method, by phototraps, or DNA sampling on feces, and statistical models then allow to deduce the abundance and the density of elephants in the studied zones based on these data.
So knowing the distribution and the abundance of elephants is a good start.
But some managers can be willing to go further and look to detect abnormalities in the social structures.
Because this can also reveal management problems to curb.
The size of elephant groups, or families, can be modified; because of the suppression of certain age groups for instance, because of intensive poaching targeting old individuals with large tusks.
And of course, you shouldn't forget to monitor the threat to elephants and their habitat, to make sure that management actions to counter them are effective.
This will be done by assisting the patrolling efforts the arrest rates, and following up on prosecutions.
So as we can see there are multiple methods to resolve these different management questions and they are more or less elaborate or reliable. 
But it is useless to choose the ones that we know we won't have the means to implement.
In the case where the resources are limited, you may only want to focus your ecological monitoring on the distribution of elephants and the threats they face, because this already gives a lot of key information to protect the elephants.
