Welcome to today's lesson about Management Effectiveness of Protected 
Areas.
The reference book that complements this lesson is the IUCN guidelines on evaluating effectiveness, edited by the World Commission on Protected
Areas.
The link can be found here.
In addition, on the papaco.org website, you will find a lot of the evaluation results from various African countries, as well as the tools that we will be talking about in this lesson.
So, let's first of all ask ourselves why management effectiveness is important.
Let's use the example of lions in Western
Africa.
On the map that we see here, the historic lion distribution is in grey, and it is, let's say, a century old.
Except in the forest, on the coast there, lions were present everywhere in Western Africa.
In dark grey
- all of these spots - we can see the lion distribution based on the estimation of a cat specialists groups, four IUCN specialists, in 2006.
The estimation shows that-- this is the good news-- that most of the lions were within or in close proximity to protected areas that we can see here limited by the black lines.
Let's now look at this map that was done in after a new study was carried out on the area to control the presence of lions in all of these sites.
The black is where the lion has been confirmed present, and so in all of the other places, the lion seems to be absent.
They are therefore present in four sites in
Western Africa: Niokolo, the WAP area - W, Arli, Pendjari - that we talked about in the lesson on transboundary areas, and then, two little parks in Nigeria, Kendji, and Yankari, and then, that's it.
Everywhere else, including in protected areas, the lion has disappeared or it is so rare that clues of its presence weren't detected.
We can therefore see it in this example of lions: even though protected areas have existed for decades, they haven't prevented a species from pretty much becoming extinct, despite it being an emblematic species.
Unfortunately, many species have experienced this trend like the black rhinoceros which became extinct at the beginning of the
2000s in the north of Cameroon, in parks in Faro, in Bouba Ndjida, in Bénoué.
There are many other ungulates that are now very rare, or extinct, like we saw in the first lessons, the Oryx dammah in Western Africa.
Protected areas are therefore, not enough to preserve ecosystems if they are not well managed with the aim of fulfilling their primary objective, which, to remind you, is the conservation of nature.
This graph, that we have already seen, shows the decline of fauna in Africa in the last 30 years.
I think it is explicit enough, especially the curve for Western Africa.
Just to remind you, that's a loss of 85% in
35 years for the major park species.
This notion of management effectiveness covers, very generally, two aspects.
First of all, it refers to our ability to do our work well, so, overall, to do it in accordance to what is expected of us.
Generally, that is what is written in the management plan.
Effectiveness is therefore our ability to do our work well.
But that is not enough, and the other concept that this term of effectiveness covers is the impact of our actions.
Is what we do useful for conservation?
The usefulness of our work.
Let's look at the following examples.
A park ranger patrols the park regularly in accordance with the established plan.
He stops poachers, and so he does his job well.
However, the poachers are quickly back in the park because the judge is corrupt.
The ranger did a good job, but it was pointless.
Another example is an officer who carries out ecological monitoring in the park throughout the year.
However, the data he sends off is not dealt with or integrated into the decision-making system.
He did his work well, but it was pointless, and so, in the end, it was not effective.
It is therefore essential for protected areas management to make progress.
A global analysis of the situation, at the global level, shows that, in fact, less than 25% of the evaluated protected areas are managed in a way that can be described as correct:
24% in the world.
In 36% of the cases, it's basic, et so, more than 40% are under the minimum requirement.
So to respond to all of this, the World Commission on Protected Areas has created an evaluation framework that allows for methods to be developed that will be based on the same approach.
This means that we can cater to the diversity of expectations, of methods, of competencies, and of contexts in quite a homogenous way and by having quite a sound basis for joint discussions.
Let's have a look at the stages in this framework one after another.
The stages are very logical and simple.
First of all, there's the context.
Where are we?
Working on management effectiveness is first of all about identifying the initial situation, i.e., the framework within which we will carry out our activities.
For example, it is in this stage that we will identify the values of the protected area.
These are the values that will direct our work since we want to preserve them.
It's also at this point that we will pay attention to the current threats, to what could happen, to the land.
Next is the planning stage.
Where do we want to go?
This stage enables us to pay attention to the management plans but also to questions the protected area's design, its shape, its structure, its legitimacy, its location, its role in the global system of protected areas in that country.
The next stage in evaluating effectiveness, considers the methods that will be required.
What do we need?
Here, we estimate the budget, the human and technical methods that are available, and the way that we will allocate them.
Naturally, comparatively, stage four looks into describing the work done or the work that needs to be done.
How will we proceed?
We analyze what we are doing, and, if possible, we compare it with the recognized standards, for example, the number of officials per hectare, the sampling rate required for good ecological monitoring etc.
That's exactly what we will talk about at the end of this course along with the Green List.
Then there's the crucial stage of evaluating the results we obtained.
What have we achieved?
Here, we identify if the work was carried out well, in accordance with the announced plan, and if it answers our question: did we do the job well?
It's also here that we make an inventory of all the products obtained, for example, the number of patrols done, the number of educational sessions in schools, the number of tourists who visited, and finally, everything related to indicators that show we did a good job.
Even more important is the sixth and final stage in the evaluation framework which focuses on the impact of our actions.
It is the stage where we evaluate what has changed in the area, and that's where we ask if our work is useful.
In particular, it is in this stage that we need to determine if the values were well and truly preserved.
For example, it could be an emblematic animal species like this cheetah.
Of course, it is the hardest stage to complete and many evaluation tools don't cater for it.
There we go, we have seen the framework for the evaluation of management effectiveness.
It is a simple tool made to help us think about our work and that will allow us to organize our own thoughts in order to progress.
It is a cycle, and so it's a thought process that needs to become permanent and that must influence our work throughout the whole year.
As soon as the area is affected, that's the sixth stage, the context changes and so we need to start analyzing again.
It isn't very complicated though.
It just needs to become a reflex for the organization whether that be during the self-evaluations that we carry out or if our activities are audited.
Based on the framework, various tools have been formalized to allow for the principles to be quickly applied to the area.
Some tools focus on the protected area networks like RAPPAM, which is a quick evaluation tool and it prioritises stages in protected area management.
RAPPAM enables comparisons between sites within a coherent whole, for example, a national protected areas network, or a system within ecosystems.
Let's take the example of the network of marine protected areas in West Africa,
RAMPAO, that Charlotte has already talked to us about, and let's see with her how it is evaluated.
We evaluate the performance of the Regional
Network of Marine Protected Areas in West Africa on several levels.
It is a protected areas network, a network of sites, of course, and so the evaluation of the performances of the sites is already a very important aspect, and in fact, most of the RAMPAO sites do or have done regular evaluations of management effectiveness, especially by using known tools such as METT.
Global evaluations of the network's performance or of its performances as a whole are mainly carried out by using the RAPPAM tool.
A first exercise was done in 2010, and, in fact, it was backed by IUCN.
So, it is an exercise that gathers all of the members of the network, the managers, who carry out this evaluation together, who identify the progress, the challenges, and who also recommend network management improvements.
A second exercise was carried out in 2013 and a larger number of requests was involved because the number of members had grown within that period.
It also tried to analyze the current challenges and recommendations to try and improve the network.
Other tools focus on evaluating one site in particular.
A frequently used tool is the METT, the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool.
It is a self-evaluation tool made to be used on one single site.
It allows us to follow the progress of one site over time, but, once again, it should not be used to compare one site with another, that is what the RAPPAM is for.
Some tools, like the EoH, Enhancing Our Heritage, a tool created for world heritage, also focuses on one single site, but they are complex management analysis tools, that are to be used when we want to go into a lot of detail.
Take some time to look at the case studies introduced in the guidelines on management effectiveness.
Have a look also at our numerous site or network evaluations in Africa, on the papaco.org website.
Finally, have a look at a blank METT questionnaire to understand the architecture and the principles.
Try and recognize the process from the World
Commission's framework through this simple exercise.
That's the end of the lesson.
The next episode will be on putting into practice some of these principles, particularly that are related to monitoring protected areas.
Have a great day.
