Hello and welcome back to the course.
Today, I have the pleasure of being with Dr Alain Staron.
He is the director of digital transformation at the Veolia group.
He is in charge of the strategy, partnerships and new services development. 
- Welcome Alain.
- Thank you, good morning.
Than you very much for being with us.
Let me ask you my first question.
Can you elaborate, as an expert in the field, what is the impact of digitalisation on urban infrastructures?
I will start by talking about water and energy.
The two main things where
Veolia is working hard.
You have to consider infrastructures are very difficult things to manage.
That takes kilometers, thousands of kilometers, to get water or energy going through any household.
And the difficulty of it is, how do we manage it? 
We use to have good expertise, very good expertise, to understand and modelize things we don't see because these pipes are underground.
What is happening with digitalisation is we get more and more sensors that will help you with measuring what is happening underneath.
You can have one every hundred meters, 10 meters
And the result of this is, instead of having only your brain to understand what is going on underneath, you will get real measures and you will get much more info about the exact behaviour of your infrastructure. 
Doing so, it'll be much easier for you to understand what is happening.
I would say more.
You will understand, we will understand but our machines might understand better, even better than us.
At the end of the day, the software, the programs, the algorithms we develop will help us manage infrastructure much better than we do now because it would be more customised to any infrastructure in a city because it takes the measurements of any city.
It's not just the global weathering, it's any city measurement.
It'll be much more accurate in terms of space because we can get a lot of sensors.
It will be much more accurate in terms of timing.
You would be able to get measurements every minute.
So, it would be much easier to manage the system globally.
Great, and then other dimensions than the management can you elaborate - what about the other dimensions? not just the management of the infrastructures?
The good thing is with these kind of sensors you get more info than the one you expected to.
You expect it for water, you expect about pressure, for example, or flow.
You will be able to get much better, much more information.
Take one example:
We used to manage water into the household.
Now, with the smart meters we even can measure the exact instantaneous flow that is going into the household.
We can measure it at night and we can elaborate the probability for any leakage in house because we will measure it.
That's a big change.
That's when we could first reassure the end user.
Telling him 'Hey, be careful'.
Second, we can put him in touch with a plumber that would help.
And thirdly, we can sell insurance.
So you can see how from a single sensor we can derive more benefit for the end user.
A better marketplace and even more services.
Great, so you know both on the management side and the services side you can really get, you know, new and more innovative ways to organise things better.
That's great, can you also elaborate what is the impact of this digitalisation of infrastructures to reach what is so-called known as "smart cities".
That's very interesting.
Smart cities, the study, the concept started about 10 years ago.
It was really about that time, you know, big machines, big software infrastructures.
I.T.
The concept and the target is the same the means to actually reach the target are different.
For me, smart cities, is very simply is the way the cities are transforming themselves.
The digital transformation of cities - is called "Smart City".
All of us, we transform ourselves.
Companies transform themselves.
There's no reason cities should not transform themselves.
So "smart city" is the exact way cities are transforming themselves thanks to digitalisation.
What is the impact of this?
Once we get so many data that improve the performance, you see that you can go up to the end user.
And the point for us is with more and more sensors understanding of what is happening you can give more power to the end user in the way he helps us managing the resources.
At the end of the day you get showers, bath and that's the way you use water.
If there's a direct relationship between what you are doing your usage and the impact on the global city, you start to become "electro" in your city.
So for a smart city the digital transformation in cities is the way to get back the citizen, the inhabitants inside the global management of the city.
Great. Which is traditionally done basically by the city government and the companies but now you're talking about having the citizens also being part of this.
How disruptive is this for the cities?
Can you elaborate?
What are the, you know,
big consequences, futuristic consequences of having that into the game?
The future is back to basics.
The first cities, back 2000 years ago, before Christ.
You have cities of about 40,000 people.
With this kind of scale it was quite possible to get everyone involved in the city.
With millions and millions inhabitants in cities that becomes impossible.
What is happening with the future of the infrastructures
The decentalized infrastructures.
The fact they do not need anymore top-down approach to get your basic services.
And that you have locally produced, produced by the end user,
"prosumers" that produce and consume at the same time.
You can start to have,
to liberate the geographical constraint of the city.
You can start to have anyone living everywhere with the same service that if you were living inside the city.
And if you consider that more than half of human beings live in cities, including in Asia in 2013 and 85% in western countries.
You can consider that almost everyone, every human being is a normal being.
Then you have to consider now that city is no more an exception a city is the way we live.
And so the surface of the earth will be cities in a new sense not geographically concentrated.
But thanks to infrastructure, digitalisation, new technologies everyone will be able to get, in every place, the same services it used to get with with some limitations, in existing cities today.
Great, thank you very much Alain for your insights.
You're welcome, thank you very much.
