Hello.
In this lesson we will discuss surveillance, which is a key feature in managing a protected area.
Protected areas require surveillance, firstly to ensure compliance with laws and regulations.
Of course, if all concerned parties have been involved in drafting the management plan, it will be more likely that these laws will be well-understood and followed.
However, this is not always the case.
Things change, communities move, the context will evolve, and so, well-organised surveillance is vital.
In this lesson, we're going to look at the different elements involved in a surveillance system.
(man) I've been around since 1999.
Initially, it was more about larger vessels, because industrial fishing, was what was dangerous.
Since then, we almost have industrial fishing under control.
No vessel today would consider entering the
PNBA.
We have to board fewer ships as fines have increased.
Before, people paid 4,800 per person, and they would be immobilized for 15 days.
Now however, since it's 100,000 ouguiyas per dugout, people are thinking twice.
We are talking about a system, or surveillance setup.
This cannot be improvised, or if it is, it has to be done in a planned way.
For it to be effective, surveillance needs to take a number of means and requirements into account.
We're going to look at all of these characteristics.
Firstly, the means and equipment required, then the training of the teams, the organisation of patrols, the different levels of surveillance which must be complementary and organized.
We'll touch on the requirement of financing.
And lastly, we'll discuss data submission and how to capitalize on surveillance.
Firstly, means and equipment.
Surveillance is generally done in a vehicle or a boat for maritime surveillance, as you can see in this example, but also on foot.
This is often an area of high expenditure.
For maritime surveillance, we're talking about the purchase of speedboats and land vehicles.
All this is very costly.
Maintenance is expensive too.
So it's important to secure sufficient funding to invest in and to run this surveillance.
In this case, please note that poachers are well-equipped.
Secondly, teams need to be trained.
You will have noticed that the evolution of poaching means that staff training in parks is vital for their mission of protection to succeed.
Surveillance cannot simply consist in stopping poachers.
The mission requires tight relationships with the communities, and so, an important part of surveillance consists in explaining, clarifying, alerting ,and raising awareness among communities and visitors.
Things don't end when an act of poaching is found.
It is up to guards to board and detain offenders, and this is a tricky step which requires method and experience.
So, in terms of training, please note these points:
1) Teams must be fully aware of the rules and regulations of the site in question.
This seems obvious, but needs to be said.
2) It's vital to acquire the methods and tools for negotiation.
3) They must have certain communication skills so as to inform communities and to talk.
Please note that in certain countries in Africa, the management of protected areas is undertaken by civilians, whereas in many other countries, such as the
Ivory Coast, or the Democratic Republic of Congo, managment and surveillance is carried out by military bodies.
The organisation of patrols.
The organisation of patrols and surveillance must be dissuasive, and based on a strong presence on the ground.
There is a high chance for poachers and offenders to be caught.
So teams on the ground must be optimally distributed according to available resources, and given the means to be able to get around quickly based on information, to conduct both planned and random patrols, for instance at night, based on information received, or even to improvise a response to new information.
The work of surveillance teams must be monitored so as to be able to assess their activity on the ground and the areas covered by patrols.
The use of GPS now enables coverage to be mapped and to see which areas are monitored per day, per patrol or over longer periods.
Now let's look at this example of maritime surveillance patrols in the PNBA.
There are several levels of surveillance and I'd like to insist on the complementarity of these different levels.
Surveillance patrols must be on the field, in speedboats or cars or on foot.
They must be able to get to locations and also to be able to communicate with the populations, so as to intervene directly.
But there is also a extra level which is much wider.
Today, with the help of GPS and aerial techniques, surveillance can be carried out more remotely.
Then, groups on the field can intervene.
Let's look at the example of the PNBA, which has both surveillance on the field with surveillance speedboats as well as a radar station which enables flying over and seeing the whole maritime area.
There are also guards on the field.
It's very important that these two complement each other.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that well-organized and well-understood surveillance will be able to include community participation on top of that of the guards and professional surveillance and that of military bodies.
Let's look together at the example of the
PNBA, for which tripartite surveillance has delivered results.
Data submission is very important.
After a patrol, guards will submit a certain amount of information to their surveillance team.
Here again, you can see the example of the
PNBA.
All instances of boarding which took place in the maritime territory have been geo-logged.
And you can see over a 10-month period in the map for boardings of "lanches" (non-motored boats) and dugouts, either from inside or the outside.
It's this type of tool that enables analyses, and to determine where surveillance needs to be increased, and where its best understood, or at which places changes and threats are occurring.
By now you'll know that surveillance is a key factor in the effective running of a protected area.
Today's poachers are using more and more sophisticated methods.
Surveillance teams and guards must be able to compete with them in a complementary way, listening to the populations.
Frequently, tripartite teams have proven their worth and have communicated their results in a way that enables communities to better understand the role of surveillance.
Thank you.
That's this section over.
Good day.
