Let's look at some alternative methods to generate thrust in a space rocket propulsion system.
We've seen the chemical-based and solid-propellant rocket, and also liquid propellant rocket.
But, there are other ways of generating thrust respectively of accelerating gas in order to, by reaction, propel the spacecraft whether it's for a central orbit, or whether it's for orbital maneuvers outside of the Earth atmosphere.
Now, a principle that was tested in the '60s and '70s with some success for a while, but then for technical reasons, and also safety reasons, it was abandoned, at least for a while.
It may possibly come back, resurface.
It's the nuclear rocket principle where you have a heating of the propellant.
In this case, we have hydrogen.
Not by chemical combustion with an oxidizer and a fuel, but by heating the propellant with a nuclear reactor that you have here, and there's a control of the flux of neutrons with a reflector, as we see here.
And what is important is that you produce a very hot gas that is expelled through the nozzle, as we saw before.
It just happens that the velocity that you can reach with this system is quite a bit higher than with a chemical rocket.
Typically, of the order of 10 kilometers per second, so it's twice the specific impulse, or twice the efficiency compared to a liquid fuel rocket engine.
This is a cutaway of a NERVA nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application.
Again, used in the late '60s and '70s, but abandoned since that time.
You have the turbopumps bringing at high-pressure the fuel, or the propellant, which is hydrogen, into the reactor itself with the reflectors, as we mentioned before, to control the flux of neutrons.
Now, here we have a representation of the cooling of the nozzle, or at least one part of the nozzle, the initial part of the nozzle, using a propellant line circulating around the nozzle itself.
We also take some of that hot gas coming out of the reactor to feed the turbopumps bringing to high-pressure the propellants, hydrogen into the reactor.
Now, an alternative method that has been used widely in the past few years is the so-called electric or ion propulsion system.
The idea is to basically ionize the propellants and then accelerate with the electric field, the propellants, and you can get much higher velocities than you can with a liquid-fueled or solid propellant rocket engine.
You see here the propellant injection, and normally we have either xenon or argon as a propellant, and it gets into the chamber.
We have a hollow cathode here that is ejecting electrons, and it is ionizing the xenon or argon to propellants.
Now, inside that chamber, you have a plasma, so it's a gas of charged particles.
And you accelerate the ions in the right part of the propulsion system, again, to very high velocities, quite a bit higher than you obtain from a chemical propulsion system.
Now, as you get rid of ions here, to the right, you need to neutralize because if you don't do that, you're going to get quite a highly negative charge in the thruster itself, so you need to inject electrons again, together with the ion beam in order to keep the propulsion system neutral so it does not attract, again, the ions that are ejected on the right-hand side.
And we get specific impulses that are typically of the order of 10, of even 100 times higher than with a chemical engine.
Now, the problem with the ion propulsion system is that you get very high efficiency or very high ejection velocity, but relatively low thrust, typically of the thrusts of the order of a fraction of a newton.
So, it can be used for propulsion in space.
It cannot be used for leaving the Earth's surface and to bring a spacecraft to orbital conditions.
It can only specifically be used for a space-to-space propulsion system, typically.
SMART-1 is a spacecraft that was launched by ESA a few years ago toward the Moon, and it used the ion propulsion system from low Earth orbit all the way to the Moon orbit using very little propellant.
It was able the outer spacecraft to the Moon orbit.
Now, other example of use of ion propulsion has a very bright future, but again, cannot be used for liftoff from the Earth's surface.
This is an example of electric propulsion, and it's typically the view that you have with that blue exhaust, like a very thin cloud of gas from the ion propulsion system.
And again, exhaust velocities stand to 100 kilometers per second.
Of course, significantly higher than you have with a chemical propulsion system, very low thrust values.
And this example is specifically a so-called Hall thruster, a 6 kilowatts in operation at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
This is variation of the ion engine.
Very bright and talented astronauts and plasma physicists, at the same time, Franklin Chang Diaz, from Costa Rica, but a U.S. citizen, came with the idea of a so-called variable specific impulse magnetoplasma rockets.
It's basically an ion engine where you can vary the thrust and the specific impulse.
Whenever you have high thrust, you have low specific impulse, but you can have also very low thrust and a very high specific impulse, or very high efficiency.
It uses a lot of the properties of plasmas and confinement of plasma in your electromagnetic field.
You have the fuel that is being fed to the chamber here.
You have a first stage of ionization, and then a heating of the plasma to very high temperatures in the rear part of the rocket engine.
And the energized plasma is ejected, not in a nozzle, in a physical nozzle, but you have a so-called magnetic nozzle confining the hot gases that are very high temperature and very high velocity in the exhaust.
Now, you get amazing values of the I_sp if use it in the low-thrust mode, up to 3,000 or 3,000 kilometers per second ejection velocity, and corresponding very high I_sp.
The only problem with this engine is that is requires a lot of energy, so either you use solar panels, or possibly a nuclear reactor to generate this high electrical energy.
But, it's a big promise for flights to Mars, possibly a human flight to Mars in a few decades from now, or hopefully less than that.
And to flight in the solar system in general whether for human spacecraft or a probe or robot sent to faraway regions of the solar system.
