Welcome to today's course, focused on ecological monitoring of protected areas, what it is, what it is for, how to do it.
There are, unfortunately for us, as many materials to look up, as there are monitoring processes, and you can find some models in this PAPACO study.
Of course, it's far from complete, so once again I asked Béatrice Chataigner, from IUCN PAPACO in Nairobi, to help us go through it.
I don't know what the zebra just told her, but it seems like she's having fun.
Let's see with her what ecological monitoring actually is.
Ecological monitoring is a set of data collecting and analysis methods that will enable to measure the status and evolution of protected areas' values, and that will monitor the threats that these values might suffer.
If you can recall what was said during the planning course, the values, in fact, are the principal reason why a protected area is created, and these values can be, for instance, the population of a given animal species, for which the ecological monitoring will enable us to know if this species continues to survive, if it can survive, and to understand whether its population can increase, and improve over time, and within a given territory.
Keep in mind that each protected area has its own values.
These values aren't the same from one area to another because stakeholders' interests when they set up the values are very different depending on the protected areas' context, culture, history, its ecology.
For instance, a community can give a lot of importance to a particular species, like the hippopotamus, here on the screen, so they might consider that the protected area's goal is to ensure the species preservation.
In that case, the ecological monitoring will be centred on the river where the hippos live.
Whereas elsewhere, the hippo might not be a species people want to preserve, especially if residents have problems with them.
Another example could be where a community, considers that the value of a protected area is the water spring at the centre of it, because this spring turns into rivers that communities use everyday for they daily activities.
If that spring is a value, that spring exists thanks to a river basin existing nearby, which captures the water and then pours into the spring, so monitoring the state of health of this spring, ,since it is the value of the protected area, is in fact monitoring the state of health of the river basin.
A neighboring protected area can have different values, so its ecological monitoring will be totally different because it will monitor different values.
There is no unique recipe for ecological monitoring, it is specific to each protected area.
This is logical.
Planning is of course specific to each protected area and planning heads towards the conservation of these values.
Ecological monitoring should be, likewise, adapted to each site, and intrinsically bound to the values it preserves.
Ecological monitoring is therefore a method of assessing a value's health, seeing how it evolves, and also taking into account the evolution of the threats it faces, to see how they were reduced, or not.
So thanks to this ecological monitoring we mesure the value's health to see if the actions carried out to protect these values succeeded or not.
And these managing actions stem from the managing scheme.
In other words, the ecological monitoring enables us to mesure the impacts of managing actions on the values, which makes it an essential method to assess the effectiveness of the managing scheme in general.
In some ways, it's a barometer of the effectiveness of the management of the protected area.
To get there, it is necessary for ecological monitoring to provide accurate and relevant data on the state and the evolution of the protected area.
In some cases, time and resources can be lost collecting useless data.
We can sometimes realise that none of the real values of the protected area are truly measured by direct or indirect data collected during the ecological monitoring, which will obviously restrict the opportunities to make informed decisions for the preservation of these values.
Results of ecological monitorings are also means of communication.
Firstly, with stakeholders committed to the protected area's management as it enables us to show them how far we've come, what planned actions have taken place, what impact they've had, and it's also a simple and efficient tool to inform other contributors and lessors on the advancement state of the activities for the values' conservation.
For that communication to be efficient, you need the results of the ecological monitoring to be presented as a map, simple, readable, intelligible, understandable by everybody.
You need to avoid by all means complex unreadable charts that nobody can understand.
It is important to use a geographical information system that produces complete and readable maps that everybody will easily read and understand.
But, careful.
Data can be sensitive.
For instance, the exact breakdown of a particularly poached species should not be communicated with a large audience.
It's logical.
The rhinoceros, white or black, is a good example of that.
So, in practice, how do we build and develop the ecological monitoring of a protected area?
Once we decided to monitor the state of health of our values, firstly we need quite a few indicators to properly mesure the state of health, and then, there is an important choice to make about the relevant metrics.
Let's take the example of a protected area where there are many ecosystems and the savanna ecosystem is considered to be the value of the protected area.
So in that case, we'll consider which indicator we need to monitor the state of health of this savanna.
In general, what happens is that we monitor the key ecological attributes, and that will constitute indicators.
So, what are they?
It can be for example some features of the vegetal and animal populations forming this savanna, and the indicators that we will monitor could be the size of the population of a particular vegetal species, that could be a very fragile one, or a fragile animal species, and this will ascertain the threshold of the savanna ecosystem's health.
It can also be the geographical breakdown of the vegetal and animal species, or its intra-population composition.
When selecting these indicators, we have to choose the most relevant amongst a large set of indicators we could monitor.
Once we made that choice, it is important to ensure that the metrics will inform us on the state of health, whether it improves or not, to make sure that we will have data, whatever scenario happens.
Let's take a simple example to illustrate this idea.
We know that the elephants have a visible effect on the forest cover, because as they move and feed themselves they break trees, eat the barks, etc.
So we have a direct effect, a direct link between elephant density and the quantity of broken trees in the area where they move and live.
We could use as an indicator, for instance, the health of the forest cover.
If we have many broken trees, we can assume that the elephant density is quite high in the area.
But then imagine, that, for example, the elephant population has been suddenly eradicated by poachers so elephants would all have disappeared, but not the broken trees, still standing there, which means that this indicator we chose would still be there, accounting for a large elephant population, while in fact they would all have been killed overnight by poachers.
For each type of indicator to monitor, there are in fact many data collection protocols that we can use, there is really quite a large number of them.
We can either take a census over the whole territory, exhaustively, or we can proceed to sampling.
This can be done by foot, by car, by plane, depending on the environment and the conditions.
But each method has its own protocol that has to be followed in a very strict manner.
Sometimes, we will count a species, sometimes, we will count individuals.
Sometimes, we will only count tracks, indirect evidence.
But anyway, we always choose the monitoring method that will end up being the most profitable on a price-efficiency ratio.
What does this mean?
It means that we will choose a method that will give the best possible quality both in terms of quantity of data, and frequency collection, and to make sure that it will be done at a lesser cost.
There are many methods, that we can't all list here, some are more frequently used than others, though.
For instance, those that you will find in the appendix of the study carried out by PAPACO on ecological monitoring.
A commonly used method is photo trapping, sometimes video trapping, which enables us to observe what happens in the ecosystem without disturbing wildlife.
On the screen you can see some results of the ecological monitoring in the National Park of Lopé, Gabon, that's the park where our university diploma is run.
There.
Some interesting images, quite gratifying to see.
Be careful next time that you go for a walk in the forest.
Obviously, Big Brother is everywhere.
But do not mix up ecological monitoring and research.
Research aims to answer a scientific question to explain an event or a situation.
It is an important element in the protected area management, but rarely a daily tool in territory management.
Of course, those two are complementary and can information can be shared.
In practice, it is true that data from ecological monitoring is useful to trigger research work, because thanks to the collected data, coming from ecological monitoring, we can see evolutions appear, and then, we can ask questions, scientific questions that research will aim to answer.
It helps to formulate research questions, but keep in mind that it isn't the main goal of ecological monitoring.
To sum up, ecological monitoring is a central element of the protected area management, because it is a way to mesure the management impacts on values and consequently, to redirect management if needed.
So, it is essential to have it set up and run by the protected area managers themselves, and not to leave that to external contractors, who have no responsibility in the territory management.
Take time to think about a protected area you know and try to define elements that the ecological monitoring should mesure according to the values of the territory and the threats it faces.
Then try the opposite exercice, read about already set up ecological monitorings to see if they monitor the values of the protected area or not.
You could be very surprised with the results.
Here we are, it is the end of this class.
In the next episode, we'll talk about raising awareness for conservation.
Have an excellent day!
A partnership between André Hoffmann, Ecole
Polythechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, and IUCN.
This MOOC results from the academic collaboration amongst the following institutions:
