Ok, let's look at orbit insertion with the specific example of the Space Shuttle but a lot of what I will say is applicable also for other launch vehicles.
Now, orbit insertion consists in bringing a spacecraft to a desired stable orbit after a launch from the Earth's surface,
When I say stable orbit, it's a LEO orbit, low Earth orbit.
We won't consider the case of a direct insertion into a condition where you can go into interplanetary flight directly but we always start by going to a low Earth orbit.
Let's look at the left hand side.
This is a so-called
<i>direct insertion into orbit</i>.
You have initial launch at the vertical, and then you have a trajectory that takes you, after the powered ascent, represented in red, during which you have the propulsion system, either one stage or two stage or three stage propulsion system, until orbit insertion.
In this case you directly go to a condition where you have a <i>V_circ</i> at the orbit insertion point.
Now, you remember that <i>V_circ</i> equals the square root of <i>µ</i> over <i>r</i>.
So, it varies with <i>r</i>, the distance to the center of the Earth as one over the square root of <i>r</i>.
Now, the disadvantage of this type of powered ascent is that you have a pretty long time going up and you have pretty significant so-called <i>gravity losses</i>.
We'll talk about that later on the next slide.
If we look now on the right hand side, this is the type of orbit insertion that we had with the Shuttle.
We have the launch at Kennedy Space Center here in blue.
Then we don't stay too long going to the vertical, but we bend the trajectory toward the East or toward the Northeast depending on the desired orbit inclination.
At this point here we have what we call MECO, <i>main engine cutoff</i>.
At this point we are on a velocity which is less than the circular velocity.
I would call it <i>V_perigee</i>.
We are at the perigee of an elliptical orbit that will have its apogee at this point here.
The reason is the following: we want to be relatively low at MECO because we separate from the external tank.
We want the external tank to be still influenced by the atmosphere and after about half an orbit, to fall down in the Pacific Ocean.
If we were higher than, say, 130 kilometers there would be too little drag for the external tank and we would not really know where it would fall down so for the case of the Shuttle, MECO was selected at relatively low altitude to allow for the tank to come down after half an orbit or 45 minutes of free-fall.
Now at the apogee, altitude of about 300 kilometers, we had what we called the OMS-2 maneuver.
It's a <i>∆V</i>, posigrade <i>∆V</i> that will change our orbit, which is blue here, which is an elliptical orbit into a circular orbit in green, so posigrade <i>∆V_OMS-2</i> using the OMS engines which are internal engines in the back of the Space Shuttle orbiter to circularize the trajectory at 300 kilometers.
If we cannot perform OMS-2 for one reason or another, we'll come down again to the MECO point which is in the high atmosphere.
This is very undesirable so we have to do everything in order to accomplish OMS-2.
Never failed to be accomplished successfully on the 135 Shuttle flights that we had between '81 and 2011.
Let's consider the losses during ascent to orbit.
We mentioned before the gravity loss.
We have also, of course, a drag loss but let's look at some numbers here.
The <i>∆V</i> that we have on the left here is the velocity that you want to reach at low Earth orbit.
Desired velocity at LEO, typically it's of the order of 7.7 kilometers per second.
OK, this is the expression according to Tsiolkovsky.
This is your vehicle capability with <i>m_i</i>, the initial mass, and the final mass, the difference between the two being the propellant used and the <i>I_sp</i>, the efficiency of specific impulse of the propulsion system used.
Now, this is your capability of the spaceship but you are going to have losses.
Here we have the gravity loss, and here we have the drag loss because you are crossing the atmosphere, so you have, of course, a drag during the whole time you are within the atmosphere.
Now, the idea is really to shape the trajectory so that you minimize these losses.
You don't want to spend too much time going up because the gravity loss is high, but of course you will reduce the drag loss in this way.
You also don't want to go too fast towards the Easterly direction or Northeasterly direction, depending on your desired orbital inclination.
That would reduce, of course, the gravity loss but it would increase the drag loss.
The shaping of the ascent trajectory is done so as to minimize total losses.
Of course, as you had these losses, the <i>∆V</i> capability of your vehicle has to be larger than 7.7 kilometers per second.
Typically, it's of the order of ten kilometers per second.
So a vehicle has to have a capability of about ten kilometers per second to inject it to low Earth orbits because of the gravity and drag losses.
Let's look at the bottom picture.
You have initially your vertical rise, and you obviously, initially have to go vertically up, and then there is a pitch-over maneuver and then just mention you have to shape the trajectories so as to minimize the losses.
At some point, you have the boost cut off, which, for the Shuttle, is MECO.
Then you have a coast period, and then you have the Onorbit burn.
In the case of the Shuttle, it was what we called OMS-2.
We sometimes had to do a so-called OMS-1 here using the orbital maneuvering system in case MECO was not quite enough to get to the proper ascending trajectory on this elliptical orbit at the apogee on which you're going to circularize, you possibly had to do an OMS-1 but normally it was not done because MECO conditions were giving you the proper transfer orbit at the apogee to the desired orbital altitude.
But OMS-2 had to be done in order to circularize.
Now, if we look at the upper picture we have the Earth launch where we have to loft the ascent trajectory considerably because of the atmosphere.
If you have a thinner atmosphere like on Mars, you have much less lofting, and of course, if you have the Moon case, you have no atmosphere, so after very short period of vertical launch in order to reduce the gravity loss you immediately go toward the East or toward the desired direction.
You have no drag loss, so you only can suffer the gravity loss in case you loft the trajectory too much.
These are the velocities that are required for Earth orbit.
I mentioned about ten kilometers per second capability, that you must have, here it's less than that
For Mars, that's what you need to have.
For the Moon, that's what you need to have.
OK, let's look at a Shuttle ascent to orbit profile.
On the left hand side you have a nice picture of a launch of STS-41-G in 1984.
You see that after the vertical ascent, shortly after leaving the launch pad, you have quite a lot of lofting because you have to escape the atmosphere as soon as possible.
Let's look at a drawing on the right hand side.
You have the first stage here, until so-called SRB SEP,
Separation of the Solid Rocket Booster and here they fall down in the ocean using parachutes and they are recovered for later flights.
This is a so-called second stage here, until MECO, which we mentioned already, the term <i>main engine cut off</i>.
At this time you are not on a circular trajectory but you are on an ascent trajectory at the apogee which you will circularize.
We had external tank separation about 80 seconds after MECO and as mentioned, as you are still in the very high atmosphere, the external tank will, after half an orbit around the Earth or 45 minutes of free-fall, fall down in the Pacific Ocean.
OMS-1 as mentioned was not always performed but there was always this possibility in case MECO conditions were not sufficient to get your rise toward the circular orbit altitude on the other side of the Earth.
You could perform an OMS-1 but OMS-2 was a must do.
Posigrade burn at the apogee of your transfer orbit to circularize your trajectory and not come back to the MECO altitude where you would have a lot of drag due to the residual atmosphere at that altitude.
This is a profile of Shuttle ascent to orbit.
Let's talk about
Shuttle re-entry now.
You had the initial circular orbit in black, and at some point here, you had to do the so-called <i>deorbit burn</i> just at the opposite point vs. the Earth where you wanted to land and of course, the target was always Kennedy Space Center.
In some cases it was Edwards, in case the weather conditions at KSC were not favorable.
Here I go to represent in another drawing the orientation of the Space Shuttle for the deorbit burn.
Again, the deorbit burn is a braking maneuver
We are using the OMS engine, firing the OMS engine to reduce the velocity and to come to the red orbit, which is here, which is a descending elliptical orbit which had its perigee above the landing point at Kennedy Space Center.
Typically, a few tens of kilometers above the Earth's surface.
What needed to be done right after the deorbit burn was a pitch up maneuver.
In order to come to an orientation versus a trajectory which was 40º nose up, this angle here, 40º nose up.
The reason why we wanted to have a relatively high alpha angle or angle of attack was to brake already with the high drag that you have with the high angle of attack in the higher layers of the atmosphere.
At this point, this was over the Pacific Ocean.
You got to the so-called entry interface at 400,000 feet or about 120 kilometers above the Earth's surface.
You still had an angle of attack of about 40º and braking in the higher layers of the atmosphere.
You had a period of constant drag so at some point you had to reduce the angle of attack because you had increased value of <i>P</i>, the density in the atmosphere, and it's represented here.
We're reducing angle of attack until you were performing a glide toward the landing runway at the Kennedy Space Center.
This is the Shuttle final approach to landing, so we enter the atmosphere over continental United States for a landing at Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and the idea is, as it is a glider, we don't have any more propulsion system for the final portion of the entry into the atmosphere, on the approach to the landing runway at Kennedy Space Center.
Here you see <i>S-turns</i> where you try to dissipate energy.
You always try to come with too much energy.
You dissipate it in a way or another, and in this phase, close to the TAEM interface, the Terminal Area Energy
Management interface, we perform the S-turn.
The idea was to come overhead the runway with an altitude of about 50,000 feet about five minutes before landing.
You see here the so-called HAC which is the Heading Alignment Cylinder and this is a projection on the surface of the Earth of the Heading Alignment Cylinder and you come here and you follow a trajectory on this Heading Alignment Cylinder, coming eventually into the final direct approach into the selected runway.
If I draw on the upper right the final approach profile, we had the following: we had an angle of 20º which is called the <i>Steep Glide Slope</i> at a velocity of about 300 knots.
It would be very difficult to perform a final flare from the 20º steep glide slope to the touchdown point which was planned to be here so there was a so-called pre-flare at an altitude of about
2,000 feet above the ground.
This is the aiming point which is before the runway, about 7,000 feet before the runway.
At this pre-flare point we're flooding the approach to a very small angle of about a degree and a half and this the touchdown point after deploying the landing here, of course, with an angle of attack of about 16º.
It's a delta wing, so a pretty high angle of attack at touchdown.
This is the profile of the final approach to the runway at Kennedy Space Center, Florida, a five kilometer long runway.
Again, if the weather conditions were not favorable at Kennedy Space Center there was a choice of a landing at Edwards Air Force base in California.
Let's consider the entry requirement of the constraints and this is very general, it's not only for the Space Shuttle but any re-entry vehicle.
It's valid also for the Soyuz and any vehicle that you want to recover.
If you have a destructive re-entry, of course, it's not applicable but this is for human spacecraft like the Shuttle also used.
You have a deceleration.
You have to keep the deceleration within reasonable limits.
12 G is about the maximum that a human being can withstand, but only for a short time, obviously.
Heating is a bigger factor.
You want accurate landings, so you want to come back.
Either the Soyuz capsule has to land with a parachute braking at the end at the proper location in Kazakhstan for lift-off in Baikonur and return in Kazakhstan and the size of the entry corridor is depending on several constraints: deceleration, heating, and accuracy.
If I represent here on the right hand side the re-entry corridor, or you want to avoid being in that part here because you have too steep a re-entry in the atmosphere and the heating is going to be unbearable.
If you are in this part here above the re-entry corridor, then you may skip over the atmosphere and not perform a real re-entry or you perform a re-entry much later which is undesirable if you want to get to a certain target.
So the re-entry corridor is where you want to be.
In the case of the Shuttle, the re-entry corridor was defined by the shape of the elliptical entry trajectory from the deorbit burn until the perigee of that re-entry trajectory.
It was only a very small angle of entry into the atmosphere but it was all planned in order to be the proper corridor, respecting all the constraints of deceleration, heating, and accuracy of the final trajectory.
