This week we looked at a range of different ways that HWTS interventions can be implemented.
We started by considering approaches that seek to either maximize profits, or social goods, like reducing disease, and how social businesses combine some of the aspects of those two approaches. 
But whichever approach is taken, basic questions of demand, supply, and financing need to be taken into consideration.
Next, we looked at targeted approaches where by integrating with other kinds of interventions, it's more possible to reach the vulnerable people efficiently.
So, the examples we looked at here were in schools, through education programs.
And with the health sector, through either maternal and child health initiatives, like this antenatal care project in Malawi, or HIV AIDS management programs.
And in both cases there are, synergies that can be had.
Both interventions can gain if for example, in the health care example, it was shown that people sought more health care when the program was tied with an HWTS intervention.
And at the same time, uptake rates were very high.
And there are a variety of reason for this.
It could be that the people are particularly vulnerable and willing to adopt a new behavior.
Could be that the communication channels are well-trusted whether its teachers or healthcare workers.
But, for whatever reason, there's evidence that this kind of integrated approach can yield benefits for both interventions.
We next considered a very specific type of targeting vulnerable populations, that of
HWTS in emergencies.
We had a guest lecture from Dr. Daniele
Lantagne at Tufts University in the USA and she talked about some of the experiences evaluating HWTS in a range of countries.
And one of the key things from her findings were that preparation is key in advance of the emergency.
And also that you have to have that combination of unsafe water and effective treatment and consistent and effective use in order to realize health gains and we'll come back to that message in next week's modules.
Finally, we looked at some of the different roles that government bodes can play in
HWTS interventions.
Different kinds of government bodies at different levels.
And took as a frame work, the human rights consideration of, responsibilities of governments to respect, to protect and to fulfill rights, and in particular, with relation to HWTS.
We saw how that fulfilling responsibility could involve facilitation through information collecting and coordination.
Could also involve promotion and evaluation of technologies.
And finally, provision of services, especially targeting the vulnerable people who have no other ways to access safe water.
We then gave an example of how national plans and strategies can bring together these different roles of government into a coherent package.
