My name is Naoko Yamazaki, and I was born in Chiba Prefecture in Japan, which is a suburb of Tokyo.
And I spent two years in Hokkaido, which is the northern area of Japan, with a beautiful night sky.
So I first started to be interested in watching stars in the night sky, and I also liked to watch science fiction movies like Star Wars.
So those science fiction movies inspired me a lot, and I actually believed we would all go to space when we grew up.
And then I became an aerospace engineer, and applied for an astronaut program.
But, on the first trial
I didn't make it; I failed, and on the second trial, 
I made it, then I started my training in 1999.
Well, both of the training standards are very historical and wonderful.
I had training at the Yuri Gagarin
Cosmonaut Training Center in 2003 through 2004.
And I had training at the Johnson Space Center from 2004 through 2010, when I went to space.
And the training at the Johnson Space Center was very well organized, and very practical and rational.
They used paper exams and simulators for practical training.
And also they trained technical skills using a T-38 jet aircraft, or in extravehicular activities, swimming pool, and some robotic operations in a simulator.
So those trainings were well organized, and I liked the international environment as well.
Other than 50-60 US astronauts, there are some 20-30 international astronauts as well from European countries,
Canada, and Japan.
And also there are some visiting cosmonauts for some training, from Russia, as well.
So, in this international environment, we could work together and we could sometimes compete together, which is very good.
And, at the Yuri Gagarin
Cosmonaut Training Center, the training were very, very traditional.
Of course, they emphasize practical skills using simulators, but they also emphasize on theory, so they use oral exams in Russian language sometimes.
Of course, we could use
Russian/English interpreter, but they encouraged us to use
Russian language as much as possible.
And we are encouraged to learn theory as well, so both training are different, but both are very wonderful.
Yes, yes.
We had to learn Russian language for four hours a day in the Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin
Training Center.
In this picture, 
I was in Cupola.
Cupola is a European made observatory module attached to the ISS, and it had seven windows, and it is used for the Earth observations, or some experiments, and for robotics operations.
And, in this Cupola, we can see in a 360° view from the windows, so it is very fantastic.
And, when I was in Cupola, my crewmate, Soichi Noguchi, was on board the Space Shuttle Discovery, and he took that picture with the Space Shuttle's window.
Remote Manipulator System is a mechanical arm with three joints, similar to our shoulder,
 elbow, and wrist.
And we have Space Shuttle
Remote Manipulator System,
SRMS or Canadarm, and a Space Station RMS,
SSRMS or Canadarm2.
Because both RMSs are developed in Canada, so that's why we call it
Canadarm and Canadarm2.
SRMS has six degrees of freedom, and SSRMS has seven degrees of freedom.
And both RMS are used to retrieve and deploy payloads from payload bay, or to the International Space Station's constructions.
I participated in the mission of STS-131, which is an assembly and resupply mission of the ISS,
International Space Station.
And, on the Space Shuttle 
Discovery's cargo bay, we attached Leonardo, an Italian made logistics module, and my crewmate, 
Stephanie, and I, operated Space Shuttle robotic's arm to retrieve it, and then hand it over to the SSRMS, then installed it on to the ISS.
And, after installation, we retrieved all the equipment inside of Leonardo and installed them inside the ISS.
After that, we loaded trash, or used equipment, or some samples, which are needed to bring back to the Earth.
Then we, again, operated SSRMS and SRMS to retrieve Leonardo back to the Space Shuttle cargo bay, so that we can bring it back to the Earth.
Space Shuttle robotic arm, SRMS, is 15.3 meters long, and Space Station RMS, 
SSRMS, is 17.6 meters long, so SSRMS is a little bigger than SRMS.
The biggest difference is while SRMS is fixed to the Space Shuttle cargo bay,
SSRMS is on a mobile platform.
So SSRMS can slide along rails on the Space Station's main Truss Structure.
And SSRMS has an end effector on each side, so it can actually walk like an inchworm.
And SSRMS also can be controlled, not only by a crew member on board, but also remotely from the ground, so this is the difference between SRMS and SSRMS.
It was a great moment!
Space Shuttle crew members,
Stephanie Wilson,
Dottie Metcalf-Lindenburger and myself, and also the Space Station's long duration expedition crew,
Tracy Caldwell Dyson, all four of us were on board at the same time.
It was a world record, and it was a great moment.
And, right now, about 10% of astronauts, cosmonauts, taikonauts are female, and I hope the ratio of female astronauts is increasing in the near future.
Well, with 13 crew members altogether on board the International Space Station, we had so much fun.
As you can see in this picture, we have lots of backgrounds, and different nationalities, different cultures, and different languages, and we learn from each other.
So it is like a symbol of international cooperation.
And, of course, on the ground, much more people are working in the world, like engineers, like controllers, researchers, all our training instructors, and even lawyers or economists.
So, it was my great privilege to be a part of this international space program.
Especially, dinner time was so much fun during the mission.
We usually had breakfast and lunch individually, but, for dinner, we usually have it after everyone finishes the work of the day.
And we exchange our space food, and, for me, I brought some Japanese space food, like fish, and some seaweed, and some curry, and we exchanged space food, and we learn our cultures, each other's.
It was a fun time.
And also, during dinner time, like in this picture, we made a water bubble, and we sometimes put M&amp;M chocolate in it, and we swallowed it, so it was very delicious.
In Kibo module, the Japanese module, for the night sleep, but, for the daytime,
I liked to make an excursion to everywhere in the Space Station.
Before docking to the ISS, or after undocking from the ISS, we spent a whole day in the Space Shuttle cockpit, which is a very narrow space.
But, during the dock to the ISS,
I usually slept in the Japanese experiment module on the ISS, but some people sleep on the Space Shuttle, so it depends on people.
Well, I think you will enjoy microgravity environment pretty much, and I really enjoyed it too.
But I'd say it's about space sickness, about 60 to 70% get space sickness when go up to space.
The symptoms are very similar to motion sickness, so we get dizzy, and we get some headache, and sometimes we vomit.
But there is no correlation between motion sickness and space sickness.
So it is very hard to predict if you get space sickness in space or not, so it's hard to tell until you actually go up to space, so it's an interesting point.
But I would say the most difficult adaptation happens after going back to the Earth.
Because you feel very heavy, especially your head gets very heavy, and you lose a sense of balance after spending a couple of times in space.
So it took, for me, about one hour to be able to walk on the ground, but for those who spend about five, six months on board the Space Station, it usually takes a day or two for them to be able to walk on the ground, and the whole rehabilitation takes 45 days.
So I think readaptation to the ground gravity is more difficult.
As an astronaut, it was very fortunate for me to be able to work with many people from many countries, so I liked it.
And also, when I went up to space,
I felt very familiar in a microgravity environment, because I think each of us is made up of the space star stuff originally, so I think space is our home town.
It's not a faraway place; it's our home town, so that's why I think
I felt very familiar in space.
And, of course, taking a look at the Earth from space is just breathtaking; it is wonderful!
And I realized we are all citizens of spaceship Earth.
Well, of course, I understood it even before going up to space.
But, in space, actually, you don't think about it; you just feel it, so that sense of feeling was very impressive to me.
Currently, I'm a member of Japan's Space Policy Committee, so I'd like to lead a good international space project in the future as well.
And also I'm an advisor to the Young Astronauts Club, and also several museums, like my home town's Matsudo City Hall,
City Hall Planetarium, and the Chiba City Museum of Science, and Sapporo Science Center, and Salmon.
So I'd like to promote space education more.
As an advisor of a Young Astronauts Club, and also as a part-time teacher at several universities,
I speak to children about space, and the current space activities, and how important space programs are.
So I'd like to encourage younger generations to participate in science, and the space field, more and more.
Since my childhood,
I was interested in space itself.
And, at the age of 15,
I watched a Space Shuttle launch on TV, and I was so impressed!
Oh, it was a real world, not in a science fiction movie, so I realized there is a real rocket, and a real spacecraft in the world, and I wanted to become a part of a space program.
And I started thinking about the possibility of becoming an astronaut.
Then I became an aerospace engineer, first.
Of course, in the space programs, there are various people, not only engineers, but also researchers, and even economists and lawyers.
But I think designing and developing spacecrafts are very attractive to me, so I decided to become an aerospace engineer.
And becoming an astronaut it's my long-term dream since my childhood, so I tried and tried.
On the first trial, 
I didn't make it, but, on the second one,
I fortunately made it.
