Here is a summary of chapters 4,5,6 : 
Resolution of linear systems.
Given a matrix A and a vector b, we want to solve the linear system Ax=b, so here N, the number of lines and columns of A is large, in applications, N will go from 10 to 10^9 (a billion).
So we have direct methods, or iterative methods.
The direct methods are :
Gaussian elimination (chapter 4), or the LU decomposition for any matrix, or LLᵀ in the case of a symmetric positive definite matrix, that's chapter 5.
Then we have iterative methods : we still didn't study this chapter which is important in practice, since if we solve partial differential equations in dimension 3 we have to use the iterative methods.
It is important in practice but not studies in this course.
Let's go back to chapter 4 :
Gaussian elimination.
Here is our linear system Ax=b, we want to transform this linear system in an equivalent one, Ux=d.
Equivalent means that I have the same vector x of unknowns, x1,x2,...,xN.
We changed the right side of the equation and changed the matrix.
The matrix U is the upper triangular matrix with 0's on the lower triangular part, we decided to put 1's on the diagonal, and its entries in the upper triangular part.
Then it is easy to solve the linear system Ux=d.
To end up with this linear system Ux=d, we proceed in N steps.
First step, we put a 1 on the diagonal instead of the coefficient, and 0 on the other entries of the first column.
On the second step we put a 1 on the entry 2,2 and then 0's, and so on until the last but one step where we have 1 0, or the last one where we have a 1.
Then we saw chapter 5 the LU decomposition, here we wanted to write A as the product of a lower triangular matrix L with 0's in the upper triangular part and a matrix U, which is upper triangular with 0's on the lower triangular part, where we chose to have 1's on the diagonal.
We get the coefficients of the matrices L and U by identifying the entries of the matrix A with the entries of the product LU and identifying the entries in the first column of A with the coefficients of the first column of LU we get all those entries.
Then, identifying entries of the first line of A with the first line of the product LU we'll get the coefficients of the first line of the matrix U and so on.
We get those entries, we identify those entries and get the second column of U, and so on until the end.
In the case of a symmetric positive definite matrix, the A=LU decomposition will be a decomposition A=LLᵀ the coefficients Lij on the
diagonal of L are positive which simplifies the algorithm.
This algorithm requires roughly twice as less operations.
