Congratulations, you made it through week 5.
In this last week, we learned about assessment and planning methods for municipal solid waste management.
Let's briefly summarize the main contents of the week.
We started the week by introducing a planning strategy to integrate biowaste management in the general solid waste management strategy of a municipality. Having a good segregation of biowaste is of utmost importance for this integration.
This strategy consists of several steps, such as framing the problem, deciding objectives and eliciting their weights, assessing the performance of the selected alternatives, and finally scoring them.
We then introduced the wasteaware indicator set, as a comprehensive and structured approach, which serves to compare cities'performance on solid waste management.
Here we see all the indicators for the physical components and governance aspects listed on the left, and the score of 4 different cities for each of these indicators.
Climate: such an important topic.
And of course the solid waste management also has an impact on it, as we saw.
Waste management practices generate greenhouse gases.
Nevertheless, we saw that there is reduction potential, depending on the management chosen.
In the past, several economic mechanisms were established, in order to trade emissions, such as the Clean Development Mechanism.
And now, with new mechanisms such as the Nationally Adapted
Mitigation Actions, or
NAMAs, this will continue.
And finally, our last module, which you will probably still have fresh in mind, gave us an indication of the future role of waste management. Linear management of both biological and technical materials should have an end, and a shift towards more circular patterns should be achieved.
This is the last course module.
Chris, why don't you join me for a last goodbye.
Thanks Imanol.
First of all, congratulations and well done!
But now for a personal request.
We need your help.
During the entire course, you've been listening to us from behind the screen, and we know a little about you.
We need your help with a last important contribution.
Please tell us how you can, and how you will be able to make use of this gained knowledge: in your job, or in the development of your professional career.
Thank you so much.
Use this knowledge.
Everybody can make a difference.
Goodbye.
Goodbye.