I'm happy to introduce our guest lecturer, Dr. Batsi Majuru, a technical officer at the World Health Organization.
Today she'll introduce the International Scheme to Evaluate
Household Water Treatment Technologies which aims to promote and coordinate independent testing of household water treatment products based on WHO performance criteria, and also to support governments in building technical capacity.
Hi, I'm Batsi Majuru.
I work with Dr. Maggie Montgomery on the international scheme to evaluate household water treatment technologies.
I'm going to be sharing more about this scheme in this session.
We're going to take a brief look at how the scheme works and who is involved, and we're also going to be talking about what the scheme is doing beyond lab testing of products — the capacity-building activities that are being conducted in various countries.
The scheme is made up of several components.
WHO acts as the scheme secretariat and coordinates all activities under the scheme.
The scheme works together with an independent advisory committee of experts in water microbiology, environmental science, and epidemiology who provide advice on test protocols and processes and recommendations on the level of performance.
There are currently two designated testing labs that are in the United States and in the Netherlands.
Work is ongoing to expand testing to other national labs to conduct complimentary testing.
We will discuss this briefly later.
The manufacturers are a key component of the scheme, as they are the ones who submit the products that are to be tested.
Their interaction is only through the scheme secretariat at WHO to ensure independence throughout the evaluation process.
Ultimately, the results from the testing are meant to guide governments and procuring entities in the selection of household water treatment products.
Last, but certainly not least, are the users of the products.
In terms of how the scheme evaluation process works, manufacturers submit an expression of interest for the evaluation of a specific product, or in some instances, several products.
This information is then reviewed by WHO and the advisory committee and recommendations are made on the testing to be conducted.
The product is then tested at one of the two designated testing laboratories.
The results from the testing are shared with the manufacturer and also made publicly available at the scheme webpage.
Ultimately, these results are meant to guide procuring entities and governments in the selection of household water treatment products.
So this hopefully gives you a flavor of how testing under the scheme works.
In the following slides, we're going to talk about what the scheme is doing beyond lab testing.
WHO is also working to strengthen the capacity of resource-constrained countries to regulate and evaluate household water treatment products to ensure that users are provided with products that actually protect health.
Many countries do not have health-based standards to assess and regulate household water treatment products, and those that do often do not have the structures in place to allow for an independent review and assessment process.
Therefore, WHO is working to strengthen regulation of these products and as an example, countries such as Ethiopia, are working to provide training on risk-based assessments, establish certification processes, and develop protocols for evaluation of household water treatment technologies.
This would enable national labs to conduct their own complimentary testing.
The second area of capacity-building under the scheme is assessing locally produced products, such as ceramic filters, chlorine solutions, and bio sand filters.
The quality of these products is highly variable, and harmonized manufacturing processes can have a positive impact on improving the quality.
The scheme is working with partners in the international network on household water treatment and safe storage to strengthen quality assurance and quality control procedures in these local manufacturing factories.
An example of such quality management processes is the Best Practices Recommendations for the Manufacturing of Ceramic Pot Filters that was developed by the Ceramics 
Manufacturing Working Group.
This is a certification process that is currently being finalized and has been piloted in several countries.
The certification process focuses on the efficacy of the filter in removing E. coli and an assessment of the manufacturing processes at factories, including raw materials that are used, mixing and molding processes, and quality assurance tests such as flow rate.
The scheme is working with the Ceramics Manufacturing Working Group to expand the application of this certification process to other countries.
Here is an example of some of the findings from assessments that have been conducted under this ceramics certification process from four factories.
You can see from these pictures that the filters from factories two and three are of poor quality compared to those from factories one and four.
The third and final area of capacity-building is field-monitoring the evaluation of household water treatment products.
Testing under the scheme is limited to lab performance or efficacy.
However, to protect health, products not only need to be effective in removing pathogens or be efficacious but also be used correctly and consistently over time.
The scheme is working with countries to assess ongoing performance in the field and use of products as well as establish platforms for national consumer feedback on these products.
I hope that has given you a flavor of what the scheme is doing, both in terms of evaluating products and building capacity in countries.
If you would like to find out more about the scheme, you can visit our website where you will be able to see the list of products that are currently under evaluation, the harmonized test protocols that we use in testing the products, and the work that we are doing to build capacity in countries.
In summary, we have talked about testing under this scheme, how it works and who is involved.
The main point to remember is that this testing is aimed at ensuring that in the first instance, products are selected that are actually capable of removing or inactivating pathogens in drinking water, but we also recognize that health impact can only be achieved through correct and consistent use of effective products.
Linked to this effort is capacity-building that WHO is doing to ensure that in the places where the products will be used most, there are regulations in place and mechanisms to assess and monitor the performance of products over time. Thank you.
