Let's talk about spacecraft closed-loop attitude control.
You have your spacecraft here, represented here as a cube with <i>X, Y, and Z</i>.
Then you have requirements as far as the orientation of these three axes versus a reference coordinate system, and you have attitude errors.
They're measured by sensors, whether they are gyros, or horizon sensors, sun sensors, or star trackers, for that matter.
And these errors are transmitted into a computer that contains a control law, and the control law decides what effectors, and with what amplitude, and what method will be used in order to control these errors and reduce these errors to zero.
Either thrusters, or reaction wheels, momentum wheels, it's the same thing, or control momentum gyros.
We'll talk about that later, and the corrections, and getting there to the spacecraft, and it's obviously a loop, in a constant control of the attitude, the actual attitude versus the required attitude.
As far as accuracy of the attitude, of course it depends on what you want to do.
For solar arrays it will typically lose four to ten degrees.
Remember, the cosine of ten degrees is about 0.98, so if you have a not-perfectly- oriented solar panel, it doesn't really matter.
For high grain antennas it has to be a little more precise, better than a degree.
For optical systems you have, typically,
10^(-4) to 10^(-1) degree.
There is one special case, it's the Hubble Space Telescope, which had to maintain its orientation to within 0.007 of an arcsecond, which is, of course, a very, very high accuracy, and it was achieved through pictures of stars that were obtained through fine guidance sensors, three fine guidance sensors which were providing pictures around the area that was being looked at, whether it was a galaxy, or a cluster of galaxies or another object, and in the field of view of these fine guidance sensors we chose two stars, and these stars were maintained very precisely, in the same location, using the closed-loop attitude control system.
But the sensor was really fine guidance sensors, extremely precise, again, 0.007 of an arc second, and you could maintain this orientation accuracy to within hours, or even days.
The Hubble Ultra Deep Field was taken in ten days, and its telescope maintained that very precise attitude for this long duration.
Stabilization by rotation, not used too much nowadays, but in the early version of the communication satellites, basically you maintained inertial orientation by spinning the spacecraft with the sun vector perpendicular to the axis of rotation.
Disadvantages are relatively low, accuracy and orientation, and also you could not point any antennas or other devices except in the direction of the axis, so that was a big disadvantage, but it was still closed loop.
We had to maintain properly the orientation of the rotation axis versus the sun vector, that was the main constraint.
Much better accuracy with a three-axis stabilization.
There are several methods we'll talk about later.
Of course it's a very complex system.
You need redundancy.
You have an example here of a spacecraft which is maintaining its orientation using momentum wheels, and you change the speed of rotation of these momentum wheels and you can act on the spacecraft to maintain its orientation.
But sometimes you get saturation, so you need to have, for instance, thrusters, to remove the excess momentum.
We'll come back to that.
This is a very widely used system of closed loop control of the orientation of the spacecraft, much more often used than the other ones I talked about before, and much more precise also.
The main techniques for three-axis stabilization and reorientation: thrusters, a good example is the Space Shuttle, or the Russian segment of the International Space Station.
And there are two methods using a gyroscope, a reaction or momentum wheels.
Hubble is an example.
Changing the rotation speed of these will change the orientation of the spacecraft.
The control moment gyros, or CMG is used in the U.S. segment of the International Space Station.
We'll come back to that, also.
