Let's talk about the methods of attitude control.
Some of them are passive, or relatively passive, others require active action, like thrusters, or spinning wheels, or things like this, but let's talk about the first one, gravity gradient, and this is passive.
If you have an elongated object, like a pencil, or, let's say, a larger object, like a rod, it will take an orientation in orbit around the Earth such that the long axis of this elongated object will be along the local vertical, with, possibly, some swinging motion, or attitude changes, around the local vertical gravity gradients.
With magnetic torquers, and this is only valid if you are on orbit around a planet that has a magnetic field, you can have a spinning spacecraft using the gyroscopic effect to maintain a certain orientation around one axis, spinning the spacecraft.
Then we'll come to a little fancier attitude control system with momentum devices: reaction wheels, or Control Momentum Gyros, and the last one very much used, whether it's for the Space Shuttle in the past, or the Russian segment of the
International Space Station thrusters.
Gravity gradient, very simple, again, an elongated object, and you have to imagine that if you have the Earth down, with the horizon pretty much horizontal on this drawing, the force on the bottom of this elongated object will be somewhat larger, even slightly larger, than the force on the top, and if you project these force vectors on a line perpendicular to the axis of the elongated object, you see that there is a torque on this object such that it will tend to come back to the local vertical but, again, there can be oscillations around the local vertical but, on the average, this elongated object will keep an orientation along the local vertical, and we'll see later, with the space tethers, if you have two object that are linked with a cable, pretty long cable, the cable will always take an orientation along the local vertical, plus, possibly, oscillations in plane and out of plane.
Let's talk about magnetic torquers.
They are used if you need an orientation to space track which is not extremely precise but, more often, they are used as a system to desaturate momentum gyros, we'll see this later, but imagine that you have a coil with an electric current, I, and, of course, it will generate a magnetic field, but, in general, we use the term magnetic moment, magnetic moment would be in this direction here, and the amplitude of the magnetic moment is going to be equal to the number of coils to the current, and to the area of each of the coils.
Now you have an interaction of this magnetic moment with the magnetic field that's represented here, the magnetic field, B, and you have an angle, θ, between the magnetic moment, vector magnetic moment of magnetic field, and there you are going to have a torque on that magnet torquer, which is given by this value here, basically, the magnetic moment amplitude times the amplitude of the magnetic fields and the sine of the angle between these two vectors, B and μ, and, again, either use for loose,
I would say, relatively loose, attitude control, or for desaturating momentum gyros, which we'll talk about later.
You can use these also for very small satellite.
There are a few CubeSats, for instance, very, very small satellite, normally academic-generated small spacecraft designed by students, that use magnet torquer bars to orient the spacecraft.
The Hubble Space Telescope needs, of course, a very accurate attitude control system because it's pointing to a celestial object, and takes pictures of celestial objects with very high accuracy, and very high resolution, and it uses momentum wheels, and we'll talk about that later, but it also has, on the side of the optical part of the telescope, this is the optical part of the telescope, this is the instrument part, and here you see two out of four magnet torquer bars.
The orientation of the telescope is via momentum wheels, but sometimes we need to desaturate them using the magnet torquer bars.
This is a view of the Hubble Space Telescope during the first servicing mission, in December '93, on the fifth out of five space walks, and quite a nice picture where you see the Space Shuttle payload bay, in the back of the payload bay, a platform on which the telescope is located, and, at that time, we were changing the solar array.
The solar arrays are against the telescope, not yet deployed, but what you see here are also the magnet torquer bars, and here they are, one of them, and another one of them here.
There are four total; the other ones are on the other side of the telescope.
On the background, you see Australia upside down.
We talked about the two methods so far.
We have gravity gradient, and the use of magnet torquer bars.
Another really rudimentary method of attitude control is a spinning spacecraft.
Imagine you have a spacecraft, pretty much like a cylinder, and you wanted to keep a certain orientation versus inertial space, we talk about inertial space here, and the side of the cylinder is covered with solar panels, and the axis of rotation is oriented perpendicular to the direction of the Sun, so the solar panels are always illuminated by the Sun and generating electricity.
Early communication satellite had this kind of attitude control.
It's no longer used now, but it was in the past.
What you want now, in most cases, is a three axis stabilized spacecraft.
Here is a spacecraft in the vicinity of a planet, target planet, whether it's Mars, or Jupiter, Saturn, any planet, and you need, on one hand, to have solar arrays oriented to the Sun, you will want to have some instrument or cameras oriented to the planet that you are studying, and you want to have communication with the Earth, either to send signal to the spacecraft or receive the data, so if you have all of these appendages that have to have a certain orientation, you need a three axis control of the attitude of the spacecraft.
You want to control it in pitch, in yaw, and in roll, all three.
