Hello everyone, welcome to this section on selected spacecraft systems.
We'll talk about attitude control, attitude measurement and control.
We'll talk about electrical power generation the spacecraft different methods of generating electrical power, and there will be a small sub-section on reliability and redundancy.
Let's start with the attitude measurement and control systems.
If you have either a man-made spacecraft in space or a natural object like an asteroid or a comet nucleus, it's going to be in space very slowly rotating subject to possibly gravity gradient forces, if it is in the vicinity of a large body.
The sun radiation there's radiation pressure, there's solar wind which has an influence also on the orientation of the spacecraft or the natural body.
If it is in the vicinity of a planet with an atmosphere there is an atmospheric effect which will change its orientation depending on its shape, its mass, and orientation of the velocity vector versus geometry.
There could be possibly magnetic effect or so if it is made of a magnetic material.
So all of these effects will have an influence on the attitude of a natural object or man-made spacecraft with attitude control.
If you want to do something useful with a spacecraft you need an attitude control system and you have fixed coordinate system with respect to the spacecraft itself and you try to control the orientation of these three axis versus either inertial or Earth based coordinate system.
The term used for attitude measurement and control system is AMCS.
It consists in measuring and maintaining the orientation of a coordinate system, as I mentioned before, attached to the spacecraft with respect to inertial or any other relevant system.
For either an airplane or for a winged spacecraft, like a Space Shuttle or Dream Chaser for that matter, we usually choose such coordinate system it's centered on the center of mass of the spacecraft.
It has <i>+ X</i> to the nose of the winged spacecraft.
The Y axis to the right wing and the Z axis to the belly of the winged spacecraft or airplane and the reason we choose these is that we want to have pitch around the Y axis, positive, when we take the nose up for the spacecraft and we want to have roll and yaw positive to the right.
This is a convention for pilots and spaceship or aircraft operators, which is quite widely used.
So X forward, Y to the right, and Z down to the belly.
If you have a spacecraft in general you can choose as a designer or builder the direction of your axis of coordinates, plus X, plus Y, and plus Z as an orthogonal coordinate system.
This is the International Space Station on orbit about 400km above the Earth's surface and the choice of the spacecraft fixed coordinate system is pretty much like in aviation where we have here the forward portion of ISS oriented toward the velocity vector and that's a <i>+ X</i> axis and we have Y to the starboard portion of the thrust at the end of which are the solar arrays and Z down to the center of the Earth.
So this is a fixed coordinate system attached to the station itself and with respect to-- we'll see this later--
LVLH, local vertical local horizontal coordinate system we normally have zero zero zero, which means the X coordinate system of the station would be toward the velocity vector and Z down to the center of the Earth.
Now it's always good to try imagine what orientation your spacecraft has when you have (0,0,0) for pitch, yaw and roll, that situation that we have for the Space Shuttle. You orient
X, Y, and Z attached to the Space Shuttle.
With the axis in this case of the geocentric coordinate system and if you want your attitude indicator inside the spaceship in fact it was available for the commander and the pilot of the Space Shuttle on the instrument panel.
If you wanted to indicate the inertial attitude in pitch, yaw and roll and if you wanted to indicate zero you will have to have this orientation.
You see the Space Shuttle here with the nose pointed towards Vernal Equinox for the year 2000, for instance.
The plane of the wings in the plane of the equator, the belly towards the Z axis or the north axis of the Earth.
This is the orientation of the Shuttle that you have reading (0,0,0) in pitch or roll in your attitude indicator in the cockpit.
Now there's another important coordinate system that is being used, especially for the spaceship like the International Space Station and the Shuttle also and other 
Earth viewing spacecraft.
It's so called LVLH coordinate system and it's defined here.
This is the position of the spacecraft, in this case the Space Shuttle at the LVLH coordinate system has
X in the direction of the velocity vector for circular orbit, you have Y toward the south of the orbit, and you have Z towards the center of the Earth.
So it's an orthogonal coordinate system, LVLH, and if you have an Earth viewing spacecraft you would try to figure out or control the attitude of the spacecraft versus this LVLH coordinate system.
Again, LVLH, local vertical local horizontal.
Now you have to realize that the rotations around X, Y, and Z are non commutative.
You have to follow a certain unit sequence.
You have to specify the unit sequence in each case.
Normally the unit sequence for spacecraft is Yaw, Pitch, and Roll but for the Space Shuttle, for the International Space Station, including all of the robotic systems that are associated with the Space Station whether it is the Space Station robotic system from Canada or for that matter, the Shuttle robotic system that was used for the assembly of the International Space Station.
We have the sequence, the unit sequence,
Pitch, Yaw, and Roll and to indicate or illustrate the importance of the sequence, let's take pitch 90, yaw 90, and roll zero, so imagine that you start with (0,0,0) with respect to the-- for instance, 
LVLH coordinate system you do pitch 90, yaw 90, and roll 0, so you end up with this orientation with the belly of the Space Shuttle or the belly of the winged system the Space Shuttle in the direction of the velocity vector.
Now if you do another sequence, if you start with yaw 90 and pitch 90, you see that you have different orientation with respect to the LVLH coordinate system
So the unit sequence is important to be respected.
In the case of the space shuttle, it's always Pitch, Yaw, and Roll last.
