- Hello Geoffroy.
- Hello Paul.
Hello everyone.
Today's lesson is dedicated to culture or, more precisely, to the benefits of taking culture in account in approaches that relate to protected areas.
You can refer to the guidelines of the World Commission on Protected Areas for sacred sites, in addition to this lesson.
Of course, it's important to keep in mind that the religious side you're talking about, like all these sacred sites, that the guidelines are refering to, this religious dimension is just a part of culture.
Culture is a bit complicated, it's a human institution based on customs, traditions and conventions.
On the contrary, nature has been for a long time perceived as a solid reality on which mankind didn't have any control, or little.
Obviously today, we see that the action of man is changing the world, this is what we call anthropocene.
So culture, that seemed to derive from nature is about to become on the contrary, one of the elements that determine its evolution.
Yes, now we do not perceive nature in opposition to culture but as two elements that are closely related.
For a few decades in Africa, and as we saw in the class on governance, decentralization policies encouraged some local communities to dedicate themselves to conservation of the areas they control by building on their cultural framework.
Exactly, sometimes sacred territories got the status of protected area, which sort of legalized their role in conservation that was initiated by the religious approach, local sanctuaries thereby became respected protected areas.
They have the double advantage of combining cultural and natural dimensions, that African communities refer to a lot even today.
When it happens, the creation of such protected areas gives the possiblity to collect knowledge and traditional wisdom that reinforce the viability of the conservation network.
Indeed, the existence of terrestrial sites usually relies on the practice of initiation, which uses forest areas that have usually maintained a great diversity of flora, and occasionally fauna, because of prescriptions, like prohibitions and taboos that are sometimes advocated, reinforcing the interest for conservation.
Yes, absolutely.
Some swamps or river sites exist as well.
Their identification is sometimes harder because marking the area is more difficult or it is temporary and evolves with time.
The example of Bijagos in Guinea-Bisseau is interesting because lots of small islands are accessible only at certain times, and only for certain initiated people.
So this tendency to use culture in order to preserve the environnement, is global, widely supported by international commitments, like the Aichi targets for instance, that you talked about earlier and that we see here.
We listen to Paul Ndiaye talking about Agenda
Agenda 21 mentions that indigenous populations and communities and other local authorities have a vital role to play in the management of environnement and developement because of their knowledge of the area and their traditional practices.
States should recognize their identity, their culture and their interests, providing every necessary support.
Here we have another justification for taking in account cultural realities in order to reinforce the conservation system, especially in Africa.
The Convention on Biological Diversity also recognizes the importance of culture in conservation and the necessity of promoting the traditional knowledge that supports it, especially the article 8 (j) and the Nagoya protocol.
Let's see how it works in the field.
A play is being performed about the settling in of new users that kill lamantins which is forbidden by the rules of the commnunity protected area.
It's very important because culture is one of the pillars of marine protected areas, here we can organize cultural groups, start an animation process and encourage cultural updates by young people.
It's important to be careful.
Even if nature and culture are frequently associated in Africa, they have characterics that make it sometimes difficult for their effective integration within a conservation approach.
Here's an example to understand the problem.
Here we see the map of Niokolo-Koba in Senegal, it's a pretty homogeneous natural space, surrounded by different cultures.
It can be pretty complicated to harmonize the rules, between, on one hand the north, essentially mobile muslim shepherds , and on the other hand, in the south, sedentary Bassari hunters gatherers, mostly animists who developped all sort of practices to catch animals.
They all speak with the manager of the park but the way he is going to approach them depends on their cultural differences and the manager will have to take their cultural identities into account to manage his park.
Many areas that became protected are the results of a reconversion of sacred territories, such as sacred wood, places for libation, totemic elements, or various sanctuaries for spirits: for instance the national Park of Orango in Bijagos islands of Guinea Bissau or National Park of the Madeleine islands not far from Dakar, Senegal, that we see on this picture.
The cultural dimension becomes more significant when it is the origin of the guarantee of respect of integrity for the protected area.
Then, it's not surprising that pilgrimages, mystic rituals and all kind of ceremonies take place there.
Apart from sacred sites, obviously, for culture and nature to go together, requires a good amount of communication between different stakeholders.
Some studies actually show that biological diversity often goes with cultural diversity, because different cultural frameworks can help preserve different values.
Therefore, knowledge, customs, traditional practices can be the basis of the persistence of a protected area, and even of its resilience.
We think, for instance, about the use of fire for maintaining savanna landscapes, in particular in sites of category four or five where the influence of humans is major.
Protected areas, made from cultural values present specific requirements.
They can belong to almost every IUCN category, especially categories number two, four, five, or just to a small number of them, depending of the diversity, of the conditions of their creation.
Most protected areas that result from this process have small territories, sometimes only a few acres, like the Madeleine islands.
Unless a decision from the State gives them a more bigger territory extension, for example in the case of Orango, here on this picture.
I agree with you.
But their is still a doubt about the sustainability of these protected areas because they are threatened by the erosion of values that were the reason for their creation.
They depend of the survival of practices that are, themselves, sensitive to the decrease of traditional values, especially in the cities.
Plus, people who hold knowledge and traditional power are almost always old, in small numbers and often poorly known and less and less recognized.
This raises the problem of knowledge transmission useful to preserve this kind of protected areas.
So, using the strengths of local cultures to stimulate the conservation of natural heritage is a challenge and at the same time, I want to say, almost a duty, because it's now admitted that the values of protected area, which we talked about a lot, combine culture and nature in an intangible whole which is greater than the sum of its parts.
One of our goals must be to use every opportunity to enlarge the network of conservation and spaces traditionaly preserved for cultural reasons represent an interesting potential use of territory.
Indeed.
Here we are.
Already at the end of the lesson.
The next episode will be on capacity building for protected areas.
- Bye Geoffroy.
- See you soon
Have a great day.
