Hello and welcome back to the course.
Today I have the pleasure of having
Norbert Ender and Ulrich Schimpel with me from IBM.
Let's get to the first question.
Can you explain to us and our participants what are the key strategies to use big data analytics for managing urban infrastructures and how different are they from traditional approaches in using data?
Yes, thanks for having us.
Very good question.
If we look back we usually think in system of records which are data bases or ERP systems that capture a certain process; something that we engineer and use that data for analysis.
Now we are moving more and more into an area with IoT, mobile devices, everyone has a smartphone and with this system of engagement becoming much more predominant, we face a huge opportunity to really bring these 2 systems together and really put the user into the center. To have a user-centric system and derive insights from this.
We call this System of Insights that accesses many different data sources, bridges the silos; combines it with unstructured data from the people and then come to new insights and analytics that are really to the benefit of the citizens and of course of the people running the city.
Yeah Mohammed and a very good example how this can be beneficial for the city and the citizen is the
Smart City project of Madrid.
Madrid turned their process; how they managed the city services from an effort-based to an SLR-based mode. They are measuring the quality based on SLA. In order to do that they established a city-wide data platform. That platform combines the ERP data, the contract data with the IOT data from the cars, from citizen feedback; so the citizen can give feedback through an app.
They combined this and the evaluate the SLR and give directions to the service people; how to improve and how to operate the service.
The benefit is really huge.
They are saving approximately
1 million euro with that approach a month so really beneficial for the city and also beneficial for the citizen.
They see now a better quality of the service for even less money.
Great. Thank you very much for the answer.
Now let's get to the second question.
What are the key strategies to get insight from the city data?
It's going back to the structured and unstructured data.
Actually we also call the data
'dark data' because 80% of the data that we are producing with sensors, videos and audio and chats are actually not available for analysis.
Now the idea is really with this new capabilities of cognitive computing, machine learning, artificial intelligence we have advanced analytics; we have
NLP Natural Language Processing we have the possibility to analyze this data and to derive insights. That actually brings completely new dimension of what we can do.
A very nice example of this is really where you think of parked cars.
They are parked at least
80% of the time in the city and they actually do have a lot of battery. They have very good sensors and if we can leverage these new platforms as a service then you might be looking for a new parking lot just because you have some kind of radar in your car.
You might do some gas leak detection or maybe even observe the traffic flow with these new systems and the analysis of them.
As IBM we see as our aim to make this easy for city's leaders and for that we've developed a platform, a software platform.
It's called Intelligent
Operations Center.
That platform helps really to bring this data together, to analyze those data and we have different use cases so for traffic management, for water management, for energy efficiency.
What is also important is that platform runs on a cloud.
I think it's very important also as a technology to put on cloud; to put data on cloud; to make them available for different applications and bring them forth to the clients.
Of course there's also a downside to the whole thing which is really the data privacy and security.
It's not only about the technology which partially exists but it's also about the usability and making people aware about this sensitive topic.
Countries have different perceptions and legislation but I think one very powerful approach is this approach of opting-in so it is actually the responsibility of the people that are offering these services to convince the users, the citizens that the services are of such high value that they are willing to give data for your benefit but of course also for their own benefit.
Very interesting. Thank you.
Then as a third question, Norbert, can you explain to us a little bit what would be a roadmap towards utilizing big data analytics in cities?
Okay Mohammed.
We see here 3 steps:
First step is really defined as more the city strategy from a business point of view.
Where do you want to have the priorities? Where do you want to achieve benefits?
Second one is then develop the according ecosystem because there is many parties has to participate in such a strategy.
Then as the third, develop the IT roadmap.
Break down the silos.
Define an open data strategy and approach with a step-by-step implementation plan.
From the approach point of view, we see here clear that you must start and make successes visible so that you can show the benefits of Smarter City projects.
Then, accept also failure.
Go step-by-step and learn and maybe correct and in all phases really keep contact to all stakeholders.
Involve them from the beginning.
I think that is also a very important element of a
Smarter City transformation.
A very good example is actually the collaboration that IBM has with Singapore; the Land
Transport Authority there and again Singapore is well known for having a very strong strategy about the city.
Our journey also was a longer process but also a very agile one.
We started with small POC's,
Proof of Concepts, We started with simulations and then slowly put into practice what our analytics are suggesting.
The topic is basically incident management.
Whenever a metro line is blocked by any means the people still have to get from A to B and it's of course a very dense area so we want to then determine which buses and other modes of transportation need to be put in place to bring the people to their final destination with very little time. Of course now we are in the phase of then rolling this out and I'm sure the roadmap will continue.
