Welcome to this video on medical waste management. The first of two on this topic.
Health care facilities are a means to protect public health by treating patients and controlling the associated spread of infection.
This generates waste which needs to be managed and such activity entails some risks.
Medical waste management is a set of measures to address those risks.
In this first video, we will focus on data to be collected in order to design a proper medical waste management system. You will learn how to identify medical waste risks, how to classify different types of medical waste and finally how to estimate their production.
If you deal with medical waste, you will usually start with something like this. Normal waste mixed with dressing, needles, vials and sometimes some anatomical parts.
It can quickly transform into something like this.
Or something more insidious. In these pictures, years of wild dumping have formed a series of layers of needles, catheter, plastic and sharp objects, something that you might happily discover when you start a building site or something even more treacherous. Look at this picture.
These kids are dredging the bed of this urban channel to sell at the market fine sand for plastering purpose. The problem is that they are downstream the main hospital in town where x-ray development liquid is dumped directly into the sewage.
Such liquid contains something that is called absorbable organic iodinated compound which is toxic to both human and animal and can contain formaldehyde, a known human carcinogen.
And of course you will also deal with the waste area where incineration happens and where a lot of smoke is produced. Usually something not particularly appreciated by the neighbouring communities.
And of course activities should be controlled, otherwise quite serious accidents might occur.
Trying to be a bit systematic, medical waste can be meaningfully divided into categories based on the level of risk associated as it is done in this WHO table.
Thanks to such a distinction, it becomes clear that medical waste management is first and foremost a set of risk mitigation practices.
This is the point defining the public health to full scope of medical waste management.
The contamination risk associated to infectious waste is properly contained inside the hospital site.
All the hospital users and the communities around the health care facilities are kept safe along the process.
In fact, medical waste products can provide the vector for the transmission of infection both inside and outside the perimeter of an health care facility.
This chart illustrates the relation between the sources, the environment, the vector of transmission related to medical waste that helps the spreading of infection.
Maybe at this point, it's also important to state what medical waste management is not. It is not cleaning or hygiene promotion. Yes of course the activities are all related, they concur to the overall same objective but it is important to stress that it is the specific and unique scope of infection risk reduction imbedded into waste management. Multiple medical waste solutions can be proposed. The best will always be the one that reduces the overall risk of infection for all the community of users involved.
OK, now after some theory let's try to be a bit more operational. Let's classify medical waste in a way that is functional to how we deal with it. Of course it is easier to see than to do.
The nature of their waste products, their treatment requirements, their occurence or not in a given context, have created quite a lot of different classifications.
Here we see the one used by or not in a given context, have created quite a lot of different classifications. or not in a given context, have created quite a lot of different classifications. the ICRC. This is the one from M.S.F.
And finally the one from W.H.O. or not in a given context, have created quite a lot of different classifications. the ICRC. This is the one from M.S.F.
And finally the one from W.H.O.
At the end really, there is no conceptual difference, it is just a matter of terminology. For this video I will use the terms proposed by the W.H.O. Sharps, infectious and pathological wastes and for simplicity, I will call chemical waste everything referring to pharmaceutical, cytotoxic, chemical and radioactive waste. Waste quantity varies a lot according to the  count. This W.H.O. chart shows how total medical waste, the squares, and the infectious one, the dots, vary according to their gross national income.
As you see we are talking about a variability that spans from six, even eight kilos per bed per day to just one.
Another factor is the type of health facility you are considering. The table here, also from a W.H.O. publication, illustrates for three different countries the evident waste production rate per type of facility and as again you can see a really big variation.
So at this point something is clear. If you have a real work case the best thing to do is to start a measure campaign to know how much weight is actually produced. A waste mapping exercise or a category and per quantity. Each waste product should be identified, where it is produced and now it moves within the hospital. Here is the result of such a mapping exercise for sharps. Here is for infectious and pathological wastes.
For example, you can see how the operating theatre, the dot in the middle of the plan, is a big producer in this category. And finally, chemical waste.
In this case, the biggest producers are the lab and the radiology department.
In conclusion, to recapitulate this video, we can say that there are different ways of classifying medical wastes.
But what really matters is the risk associated to each category.
The quantity of waste produced in an healthcare facility depends on the level of medical care and the type of facility concerned.
Among the quantity produced, about
10 to 25% is considered hazardous medical waste or special waste. This entails significant potential health risk. The rest is considered as general waste similar to a household waste. Given the high variability of data, quantity should be measured and not estimated.
Finally, the assessment should also include where the waste is produced.
Based on all this information, we can look on how to implement a medical waste management system.
