Imagine you're in an urban area similar to this where limited space available for treatment.
How could you increase the treatment capacity of an existing plant?
Or how could you design treatment plants that need less space?
In this module, you will learn about one technology that could contribute towards finding a solution.
Following this module you'll be able to explain conditioning name types of conditioners and understand considerations for the design and implementation of conditioners at fecal sludge treatment plants.
Conditioning is the increase in the separation of liquids and solids in fecal sludge by the addition of chemicals before settling and dewatering technologies.
These chemical lead to destabilization of solid particles called coagulation and produce larger flocs called flocculation.
Depending on the chemical used these flocs have a better settling thickening faster dewatering or result in increased solid concentration.
Conditioners have been used for decades in the dewatering of the different types of waste water sludge.
Polyelectrolytes, also called
Polymers, Lime
Ferric chloride or Alum are common conditioners for waste water sludge.
Conditioning can have a large influence in sludge treatment by increased settling thickening conditioners can increase the effluent quality from settling thickening tanks and thereby reduce the sold and organic concentration that require further treatment.
By increased dewatering, conditioners can reduce the time of dewatering and thereby increase the treatment capacity of existing treatment plants or decrease the treatment (INAUDIBLE) of new plants.
The selection of conditioners and the optimal dosage is specific to the sludge type and dewatering technologies for example, a centrifuge versus the drying bed.
In comparison to waste water sludge, hardly any experience is available for conditioning of fecal sludge.
To transfer the use of conditioners to fecal sludge information for manufacturers and laboratory experiments are required.
In the laboratory, mixing conditioner with fecal sludge in jar tests, shown here, followed by observing the settling and thickening performance in Imhoff cones, as show here by comparing unconditioned fecal sludge to conditioned fecal sludge and determination of capillary suction time as shown here, can be used to assess the performance of the conditioner in dose.
The capillary suction time is and indicator for the dewatering raid of sludge
Similar experiments can be conducted an a bench and pilot scale with settling thickening dewatering columns as shown here.
Conventional conditioners used for waster water sludge are expensive and commonly rely on a complex supply chain.
In a study in Dakar, Senegal, we assessed the potential of conditioners they could be produced locally such as moringa oleifera seeds and Chitosan, that could be reduced from shrimp waste.
The goal was to increase settling and dewatering.
Locally available conditions were compared to commercial products used in waste water sludge treatment such as Lime and Polymers.
This graph, for example, shows the results of specific resistance of filtration.
Specific resistance of filtration is another metric to measure the dewatering rate.
A lower resistance of filtration means fast dewatering.
From this graph we can draw two conclusions firstly, the dewatering rate od unconditioned fecal sludge is significantly lower than those compared to waste water and water treatment sludge results from the literature.
Secondly, moringa oleifera and Chitosan were as effective increasing dewatering than commercial Polymers used in waste water sludge treatment.
In this study, conditioning of septic tank fecal sludge could be used to suspend solids in the effluent of settling thickening technologies by 80-90%
The dewatering rate for the example on drying beds could be improved by 70-90%.
This could reduce the dewatering time of sludge on drying beds by 60-95%.
Next to the treatment performance we also looked at the feasibility of these conditioners to be produced locally.
In Dakar, insufficient quantities of moringa oleifera seeds for conditioning of fecal sludge at Dakars treatment plant were available.
In contrast, it appears that sufficient quantities of shrimp waste could be sourced and available for the production of Chitosan as conditioner.
This study can also be downloaded for no charge from our website.
Could fecal sludge conditioning be a solution for your city?
Here's some additional important considerations for it's implementation.
Conditionings are commonly dosed as a function of total solids.
This is challenging for fecal sludge and it's highly variable.
Next to a tank for additional storage and dosage device a homogenization tank may therefore be required.
Complete mixing of fecal sludge with the conditioner is important for optimal conditioner usage however mixing speed should be selected to avoid floc destruction.
This should also be considered during the selection of pumps for example, for the transfer of conditioned fecal sludge from a settling thickening tank to a drying bed.
In this module you have received an introduction to conditioning learned about the conventional conditioners and learned important considerations for the implementation of conditioners in fecal sludge.
These include identification of the optimal dosage and availability.
