Can you believe that these fuel pellets and these briquettes were made out of faecal sludge?
I understand if you're skeptical.
In this module you will learn about important considerations for the production of solid fuels.
Following this module you will be able to describe treatment products that can be used as a solid fuel, name characteristics that are relevant to assess the potential and understand what's to be considered for it's implementation.
Why would someone consider producing solid fuels from faecal sludge especially considering that it's 95% water?
Illustrated in this graph is the market value of different faecal sludge treatment products in
Dakar, Accra and Kampala.
The values are reported as U.S dollar
(USD) per ton dried faecal sludge.
The graph demonstrates that solid fuels such as dried faecal sludge from drying beds can generate more revenues in comparison to other treatment products.
For example in Kampala, the values of solid industrial fuel was estimated to be
32 USD per ton in comparison to 16 USD per ton as a soil conditioner.
This study can also be downloaded free of charge from our website.
Based on our more recent research in Kampala we would even estimate a higher price for dried faecal sludge as a solid fuel of 60 to 80 USD per ton.
Lack of financial resources is a frequent reason for the failure of faecal sludge treatment services.
Increased revenues generated from solid fuels in comparison to a soil conditioner could be used to partially offset faecal sludge treatments costs or discharge fees at faecal sludge treatment plants.
Due to the low solid content in faecal sludge de-watering and drying are important for the production of solid fuels.
Next to settling thickening tanks and drying beds innovative and established technologies from waste water sludge treatment such as conditioning, pelletizing and the use of green houses as shown here, should be considered.
Let's have a closer look into pelletizing.
Pelletizing is the processing of de-watered sludge into a pellet form such as these.
As part of our research, we implemented a bioburn pelletizer at a faecal sludge and waste water treatment plant in Kampala.
The research demonstrated that faecal sludge from drying beds could be pelettized at a moisture content ranging from 40% to 60%.
Following pelettizing, we then evaluated drying of pellets to 10% moisture. 10% is the moisture content of most solid fuels.
Drying of pellets only took around 1 week in comparison to weeks or a month on drying beds.
Dried sludge in a crushed or in a pellet form is 1 treatment product that can be produced from faecal sludge with drying technologies.
Here you can see dried faecal sludge being used as a fuel for firing of clay bricks in a pale skillet kiln in Kampala.
Using dried faecal sludge as a fuel, we were able to achieve the required temperatures for brick production and the heating performance was comparable to coffee husks which are commonly used in Kampala.
Char briquettes are another energy recovery product that can be produced from dried faecal sludge.
The process of char production is called carbonization or slow-pyrolysis.
Carbonization is a thermal chemical conversion of dry biomass in the absence of oxygen at temperatures ranging from
300 to 600 °C.
This is the same process that converts wood into charcoal.
Carbonization products includes gases that can be used to provide heat for the carbonization process or sludge drying and char that can be used to produce char briquettes.
Following carbonization, char is in a powdery form in which it cannot usually be directly used for energy recovery in households or institutions.
Briquetting of char with a binder such as molasses or as cassava flour can convert the char from a powder in a form that is comparable to wood-based charcoal.
In the market place solid fuels produced from faecal sludge have to compete with existing fuels such as coal, sawdust, coffee husks, char briquettes and charcoal.
Let me walk you through a few parameters that you will be likely to be confronted with when talking about solid fuels.
The calorific value, an estimate of the energy content, is an important characterization parameter.
The unit of the energy content is megajoules per kilogram
100% dried faecal sludge
(MJ/Kg).
This graph shows the energy content of dried faecal sludge in Kumasi, Dakar and Kampala and compares the values to fuels commonly used in these cities such as coal, coffee husks, rice husks and saw dust.
As you can see, the calorific value of dried faecal sludge is comparable to other commonly used biofuels.
On average, you have
17 MJ/Kg dried sludge however depending on the faecal sludge characteristics and the treatment technology used sludge can also have lower and higher calorific values ranging from 10 to 19 MJ/Kg dried sludge.
Among others, the difference in calorific values can be explained by the high concentrations of inorganic material in the sludge.
Inorganic material is estimated by the parameter ash content.
It is the proportion of fuel that does not burn and therefore does not contribute to the calorific value.
Potential contributions to inorganic material come from soil in unlined or partially lined pit latrines, from sand and soil entering onsite sanitation technology through a drop hole and sand from drying beds during treatment.
Ways to keep sand out of faecal sludge need to be improved upon to increase the energy recovery potential of faecal sludge.
Carbonization of sludge also increased the ash content by removal of volatile gases.
In one study conducted by Sandec and in research partners in Dar es Salaam and Kampala, char produced from dried faecal sludge had calorific values of
7 to 11 MJ/Kg dried sludge and ash contents of 55 to 70%.
These are high for use as solid fuels considering that based on the literature charcoal has a calorific value of
31 to 33 MJ/Kg and an ash content below 5%.
Co-processing of char produced from faecal sludge and wood-based char dust has the potential to increase the fuel properties.
These pictures show charcoal and briquettes from a fuel comparison conducted in Kampala. In this study which was based on calorific value, ash content, the time to boil
5 liters of water and emissions the performance of coal processed faecal sludge char briquettes were comparable to char briquettes sold in Kampala and produced from agricultural waste.
The calorific value was
19 to 20 MJ/Kg and the ash content
22 to 37%.
Do you think solid fuels could be a good resource recovery option for your city? Here are some additional considerations.
Existing examples of the use of fuels produced from faecal sludge are few.
This means marketing will be required to demonstrate that these fuels can be a competitive alternative to existing fuels.
Large industries such as cement or brick companies could be important customers for the use of dried faecal sludge and they could provide a large and consistent revenue stream for treatment operators.
However, quantities of fuel that large industries require for full scale implementation may exceed the quantities of sludge that are currently being treated.
For example, in Kampala in 2015 around 4 tons of dried sludge were produced daily at the Lubigi Waste
Water and Faecal Sludge Treatment plant whereas interviewed cement companies said they required at least
10 tons per day for use fuel in their kilns.
Faecal sludge also contains elements that can produce emissions during carbonization and combustion such as nitrogen and sulfur oxides, particulate matter or black carbon.
These can all have negative impacts on the environment and litigation needs to be considered before implementation.
In this module we learned about
2 treatment products that can be used as solid fuels. We also learned about relevant characterization parameters for these products such as ash content or calorific value. Important for implementation will be research on carbonization technologies and related emissions.
In addition, marketing and increasing available sludge quantities are important for the success of faecal sludge as solid fuels.
