Hello. 
In this sequence, we are going to study the different aspects of tourism inside protected areas.
Tourism can have a positive impact on protected areas.
It can provide funding for the protected area and its communities, help to raise awareness among visitors and communities alike, and maintain the landscapes.
It can also have a negative impact: pollution, degradation, it usually requires a lot of resources, water, food, and space.
It can also have a significant cultural and social impact with the population and with the communities.
Note that tourism differs a lot across the protected areas.
In some countries, particularly in East Africa, there are more than 100,000 visitors per year, who want to see the wildlife, the megafauna, present in these PAs.
Other protected areas only have a few.
Now, let's take a look at those differences.
For this sequence, I encourage you to refer to three manuals and guides.
The first one is in French : Le tourisme dans les aires protégées d'Afrique de l'Ouest.
I also invite you to read the analytical report of the evaluation on Marine Protected Areas by the FFEM, and in particular the sixth section, on tourism management in MPA.
Lastly, read the IUCN guidelines
Sustainable Tourism and Protected Areas,
It has stayed a reference guide and it is in English.
The experiences accumulated in the different protected areas, as you will see it in your reference documents, can lead us to distinguish different kinds of tourism in terms of their impact, the income that these activities can provide, on a local, national, or even international level.
We can divide these touristic activities into five groups.
On one hand, high-end tourism.
It is sought after to generate funds.
The drawbacks: generally not a very good impact on the environment, and most of the time, profits leaving the country.
Medium to low-end tourism, can be a good source of revenue for the protected area, most of it will be produced by concessions entrance fees.
But it also has a lot of impact on the environment.
Sustainable and/or responsible tourism can create a variety of jobs, easily accessible for the communities.
There is little impact on the environment, and profit that goes directly or indirectly to the communities.
Be wary, this kind of tourism can be quite volatile, and you need a solid partnership to make it work.
The community tourism is often the one preferred by the communities.
Here again, direct jobs, although few in numbers small impact, and direct and immediate profits for the population.
Only, it's often on a very small scale, and needs a lot of supervisory work.
Lastly, scientific tourism, present only scarcely, in protected areas, but which can prove very profitable.
It requires significant investments.
Let's look together at ecotourism, or community tourism in protected areas, with an excerpt of a video shot in Senegal, in Casamance, and in the Bamboung park.
The modern tourist wants to go to villages inside marine protected areas.
Because when you go there, you can see everything.
They come here, to la Pointe Saint-Georges, to see manatees, because it's quite rare, nowadays.
The customers who come here are interested in ecotourism, in the environment, and in what we are doing.
Also, the campsite is on a island, where it's calmer, more quiet and relaxing, with an important diversity.
I think that's why our clientele comes here in Bamboung instead of going to expensive hotels.
The campsite was built in order to secure the future of the MPA, the Marine Protected Area of Bamboung.
The main goal is to be able to pay the ecoguards, pay for the oil so that they can patrol the protected area.
Then, it's also contributing to the local economy.
Every month, there is a part of the profit that goes to the marine protected area, and to the rural community of Toubacouta.
One of the assets of the campsite is that we put forward the discovery of the area, the visitors find themselves in the heart of the mangrove, so it's both beautiful, pleasing, but also very enlightening because they can be in contact with the wildlife, with the ecosystem of the mangrove.
Now, let's take a look at the role of the
Protected Area's manager with regard to tourism.
First, he will have to promote the development of sustainable tourism.
We are looking for community or ecological tourism to develop as an alternative or additional activity for the communities and local population.
The manager will also have a preventive and accompanying role for the touristic development.
The goal is to anticipate and reduce the risks and impacts.
We will then conduct impact studies, a survey to establish if the protected area can sustain a large enough number of people.
We will conduct a business plan in order to anticipate risks, and manage conflicts between the parties involved.
For example, between the fishermen and tourism, we will study in particular, the social aspects.
Lastly, we will make informative content available, for both the visitors and the population.
The other role of the manager is to keep some of the income from the tourism activities for the protected area, to fund part of its operations, for example, the surveillance in some protected areas.
All of this requires an active and attentive role from the manager.
Now let's look at the benefits that the PA can gain from this.
All the parties expect to get some profit from tourism.
But the time scales to get these benefits can vary.
Communities hope for quick earnings.
Private operators can't expect to obtain financial equilibrium before three to five years, depending on the countries and the types of hotel industry involved.
On an other hand, the autonomy of the protected area, thanks to the revenue of tourism, cannot be achieved before many years, if it ever comes, even though substantial revenues can be earned earlier.
The income from tourism falls into four categories:
The entrance fee to the protected areas, the price of which can vary a lot.
It will be free in some areas while it will cost 20 to 60 dollars in Tanzania, or 9 to 20 dollars in South Africa, for example.
The license-fee on activities, in marine environment, for example mooring sites, diving sites or yachting.
License-fees on hotel concessions, and other activities and sources of income for the communities: craft, local products, tourists guiding, etc.
Now let's insist on some key notions regarding tourism in PAs.
Coming first, is the redistribution method of the profits made.
It should be studied on a case by case basis.
The creation of a community fund is an interesting solution.
It allows for the communities to claim a part of the park's revenue and to manage it directly.
In any case, it is important to evaluate the potential benefits generated by tourism, and to clarify in advance the part going to the local population, and the part going towards the operating of the protected area.
We talked briefly about the manager's role earlier.
We have to think about the role of the manager in regards to tourism.
Sometimes, the protected area can be fully involved into managing and developing touristic activities.
Yet we can ask ourselves if the manager's role is really this one, or if he should rather focus on making sure that the touristic activities present in the
PA do not impact it in any negative way, like we saw earlier.
Note that tourism is also a business: it is therefore recommended to establish partnerships with tourism professionals and to develop efficient tools with them: a business plan, like we saw, is important, so are load capacity studies, and fair partnerships between the tour operator and the park.
Lastly, good practices regarding tourism must be developed at all levels.
In the relations with the communities, and the choice of tourism sites, in the adjustments needed when construction or exploitation projects are ongoing where priority will be given to local materials, workforce, etc., and in the field of touristic activities.
To develop a hotel industry that respects the environment is often a priority.
Take a look at some examples of labels like
Green Globe or others.
That's it, our sequence is over: needless to say, tourism in protected area also needs management.
It's not the jackpot, even if income from tourism can bring substantial revenues and help to obtain financial stability for the protected area.
I suggest that you read the reference manuals for more information.
Have a nice day.
