Intelligence plays a key role in planning and implementing surveillance activities.
Information is indeed key to improving law enforcement.
It helps to implement a preventive strategy, planning and implementing better targeted operations and carrying out more effective cases against criminals.
However, the implementation and operation of an effective intelligence system in protected areas are often defective.
Intelligence must be conducted by dedicated units, with personnel who is able to collect and analyse data on crimes related to wild species, and with all the technical, technological and financial means at hand to effectively accomplish their mission.
It is essential to work with the police and other State security services to exchange information useful to the investigation, as well as getting support from NGOs or other local community organisations.
Data collection relies on a discreetly managed network of informants who remain anonymous for their own protection.
These individuals are usually from the neighbouring communities, but can really be any person who has information (poachers, agents, merchants, tourists etc.).
A system of incentives must encourage the sharing of information: a financial or in-kind award can be given to the person who helped arresting the criminal.
In Côte d’Ivoire, if an information has helped arresting a poacher, the informant gets a financial compensation only if the poacher is sentenced in court.
In such a system, proceedings must be carried out until the end, with a solid case that would not allow the defendant to be freed.
The system of incentives must therefore encourage the provision of relevant information, especially coming from people specialised in the matter.
If the award isn’t encouraging enough, the risk is that informants give information on agent plans to poachers or gold diggers.
Once collected, the information must be put in a data base where they can be consulted and analysed to plan patrols.
When there is a lot of information, it is recommended to use specialised software, or to make them more available to all levels of park management.
Otherwise, in most cases, a table or a database like Microsoft Access is enough.
A good intelligence system helps to collect evidence better, and aims at officially prosecuting the offender.
In some countries, when guards have found a crime scene (and secured it), an investigative unit specialised in environmental crimes is in charge of carrying out investigations in partnership with the police if needed.
This is the case in Kruger National Park in
South Africa, where agents collect and manage all the evidence to build solid and effective investigative cases.
Thereby, intelligence must also be subject to standard operational proceedings to guide the collection and the treatment of evidence by investigators, as well as actions of different actors before patrols.
Even though it is often neglected, intelligence is a key factor of patrolling success, and a relevant way to lower costs by allowing better targeted and more suitable planning.
Studies have shown that informed patrols have
30 times more chances to find poachers than simple patrols carried out at random.
