Hello and welcome to today's lesson which is about the Convention on International 
Trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora.
For more information, you can check out the Convention's website, the address of which is here:
For this course, I asked our WWF colleague,
Lamine Sebogo, to help us this week.
He is based in Nairobi, Kenya.
He is specifically in charge of elephant conservation.
So, what is this agreement, and what is its purpose?
This is CITES; CITES is The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
We also call it the Washington Convention because it was adopted in Washington in 1973.
This agreement is supposed to regulate international trade in species of wild fauna and flora to ensure that trade does not lead to the overexploitation of species which may lead to their extinction.
But does the international trade in endangered species or products derived from them really threaten the survival of these species?
This trade is a real threat to fauna and flora.
Let me make two points.
The first point is that the trade is becoming increasingly important because the demand for these products is growing exponentially.
At some point, nature itself may not be able to supply the products that the market demands, so that's a threat.
There will come a time when there will be over-exploitation which could compromise a species' survival.
The second remark is that CITES specifically targets the trade in specimens of certain endangered species threatened with extinction.
Take the example elephants which are decimated because of ivory, and rhinos, because of their horns.
Even plant species such as rosewood from Madagascar are affected.
There are many examples, but I will mention only a few.
So when the trade in these species is not regulated, these species reach the threshold of extinction.
Let's see how the convention works in practice.
As we'll see, it's not so simple.
Under this agreement, species are grouped into annexes.
There are a total of three annexes, and species are combined according to their degree of protection which is their degree of threat.
You have for example, Annex 1, which regroups really endangered species threatened with extinction, and these are species for which trade is prohibited.
The export, re-export of any specimen of these species is prohibited except under certain conditions including research.
Species that are regrouped under Appendix include species of fauna and flora.
Regarding fauna, we must mention mammals, reptiles, and birds.
The African Elephant, for instance, is listed under Appendix 1, as are the great apes, including gorillas and chimpanzees.
All are in Appendix 1 of CITES.
So the trade and international trade of all of these species is banned.
The second category covers the species listed in Appendix 2.
Appendix 2 includes species for which the international trade in specimens is allowed but regulated.
The trade in specimens of these species requires an export certificate or re-export certificate to be issued by the exporting countries.
All this is to ensure that there is no over-exploitation of these species.
There is control and regulation so that the resulting use of these species is sustainable.
The Guinea baboon, the white-bellied bustard, and among other birds, the Madagascar sparrow hawk, and even the Royal Cobra are among these.
There is also the wild cat found in sub-Saharan
Africa.
All these species are part of Appendix 2.
Appendix 3 contains the list of species proposed by member states.
Proposing a species for inclusion in Appendix assumes it’s overexploitated at a national level, and that steps have already been taken at a national level to protect the species, and that the co-operation of other states is required.
I will cite the Dorcas gazelle as an example of a species nominated for inclusion in Appendix
The proposers were Tunisia and Algeria.
Regarding the species in Appendix 3, the export document is the certificate of origin issued by the CITES bodies.
It must be said that both the export certificate or re-export certificates or other permits are issued by the country of origin under very strict conditions.
The elephant is a symbolic species for the convention as its possible trade for ivory causes many problems.
What is the situation now?
The situation of the African elephant is as follows: the African elephant has a lot of problems.
The situation is not good!
The situation is not good, and that is why all elephant populations in
Africa were transferred to Appendix 1 of CITES.
Since 1989, if memory serves me correctly.
Meanwhile, there are other populations, including elephant populations for four southern
African countries which were transferred back to Appendix 2 of CITES.
The underlying reason for this reclassification is that these populations are relatively well-managed.
There are four countries:
South Africa, Namibia,
Botswana, and Zimbabwe, which benefited from a transfer to Appendix
This allowed them to legally trade their stocks, twice, I think, under certain conditions.
Of course, this sparked much controversy.
There are people who think that legal trade cannot coexist with illegal trade, believing that it is the legal trade which itself contributes to the exacerbation of the illegal trade in ivory, and therefore, increases poaching, whereas others think that no, regulated legal trade, where it occurs, does not lead to increased poaching.
Poaching however is not the only pressure at work.
The loss and degradation of remaining habitats and their fragmentation poses a problem for the elephant's survival.
The elephants in West Africa are suffering most from the destruction and fragmentation of their habitat.
There are also conflicts between them and populations.
Many people have problems because they lose their crops and infrastructure is often destroyed.
But there are what we call indirect threats which cause direct threats and demographic pressure.
There are more and more people and more and more mouths to feed, and people need a lot of space for human settlement and for their activities.
Added to this are major infrastructures which are sometimes implemented without their impact on conservation being studied.
We now know the basics.
Please take the time to study the website and browse CITES' Appendices to find out what species you know or which live in your
Protected Areas that are affected by this agreement.
This is the end of this lesson.
The next episode will focus on concluding and setting your assignments for next time.
Have a great day.
