Congratulations! 
You've made it to the end of the course.
Hopefully Sara and I have encouraged you to think critically about drinking water treatment issues in developing countries.
And if you've enjoyed these lectures please consider signing up for Sandec's MOOCs series dedicated to WASH in Developing Countries.
The second course in the series is dedicated to strategic environmental sanitation planning, taught by Dr. Christoph Lüthi.
The third Sandec MOOC is focused on Solid Waste Management in Developing Countries, taught by Dr. Christian Zurbrügg.
The final course led by Dr. Linda Strande is on Faecal Sludge Management.
You can find each of these Sandec MOOCs on the course web page periodically.
Lectures will also be hosted on Youtube through Sandec e-Learning web page.
You can find e-Learning link at sandec.ch
In this MOOC on HWTS we started off with the "why", or why treat water at the household level, covering how drinking water can be contaminated, what some of the main pathogens are, and what the resulting impacts can be on human health, especially relating to diarrheal disease.
You should now have some familiarity with the global burden of disease and know where to get estimates about deaths and DALYs from a number of sources.
We then moved to the "what", to see what processes and mechanisms are involved in HWTS and how effective these are at removing different types of pathogens.
After these two modules you should have a good appreciation of the strengths, as well as the limitations of different HWTS options.
The last few weeks have been more about "how".
How can HWTS be effectively implemented in the field?
Either through a profit-oriented approach or more of a public health approach aiming to reduce disease.
We gave examples of focused interventions targeting particularly vulnerable populations and considered the different roles that governments can play in HWTS.
We ended with the discussion of Monitoring and Evaluation, including both validation of technologies and monitoring of HWTS interventions and health impacts.
Throughout we've only scratched the surface of the subjects covered and we've tried to provide links to more detailed documents and resources, wherever possible, especially those that are freely available on the Internet.
If there has been one theme through the course, it is that no single HWTS option can solve the problems of unsafe drinking water.
In fact, HWTS should be seen as a short term measure to reduce health risks until safe, sustainable drinking water is available at the household level for everyone.
Until that time different HWTS options can play important roles depending on the local conditions.
I'd like to thank my guest lecturers, 
Maggie Montgomery from the WHO,
Danielle Lantange at Tufts University,
Heiko Gebauer and Caroline Saul from Eawag and Sophie Boisson from the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
If you are following the forums, you got to virtually meet Fabian Suter and the rest of the supporting team.
They really did an excellent job fielding questions, arranging lectures, and providing translations, and, of course, we had great technical assistance from the teams at EPFL and Coursera.
Finally we would like to thank you all, the participants, and especially the hundreds of people who contributed to the conversations on the online forum.
So best of luck with that final exam, and we hope to see you again in the next MOOC series.
- Good bye.
- Bye.
Oh, that was good. 
Can I get you a drink, Sara?
- Maybe a...
- Water would be great.
- A glass of water.
- Thank you.
- Cheers!
- Cheers!
