In this module, we have seen how important it is to consider culture when looking into the conservation of protected areas.
Sometimes, this can oppose conservation objectives, but it is most often the case that it is a quality that can help in the protection of parks and reserves when it is well understood and respected, and enables the association of population and local knowledge to conservation efforts.
By the way, Ssome protected areas, make it one of the values to be conserved for the same reasons as the flora or fauna, and some parks are directly born out of sacred territories for example.
Education is another aspect in the development of protected areas.
The management of these territories and their partners need specific skills, and these must be passed onto them by programs which are adapted to the specificities of Africa.
This training is also a crucial factor when addressing necessary changes for protected areas, in terms of management and governance.
There are already many training courses available, but there is a tremendous need, whether in the classroom or online, and this MOOC, we hope, will meet this need on a modest scale.
The management of marine protected areas meets the same requirements as that of the protected areas in general.
However, specialized knowledge, methods, and equipment are necessary, as they are natural environments with different balances and issues.
The areas are fluid and open, resources are less visible and often not well known, even if they are especially coveted, as much for food safety of the local populations, as for the economies that depend on fishing.
Marine protected areas must also be considered as one of the tools in coastal management, more generally.
We can also approach management of protected areas via the species that inhabit them.
These are often good indicators of the stakes and the pressures of the area.
These are also significant resources, no matter how they are used, consumed or not.
They are unfortunately sometimes a source of conflict with neighboring populations, and this requires the development of strategies to control these nuisances.
A specific tool can help us to understand and protect these species: the Red List which defines their status and the urgency of their conservation.
Tourism in protected areas can itself be linked to these species in territories which are still rich in emblematic animals and flora.
It can be a source of revenue, for a good number of sites, providing advantages both to the communities and to the protected area itself.
It is also an important vehicle in raising public awareness of the importance of protecting these zones.
The manager's role is partly one of support for tourism development, in order to reduce the risks and the negative impact, if there are any, and partly a role of encouraging the development of sustainable ecotourism, producing, most often, direct benefits for neighboring communities.
And finally, relating to plant and animal species, a specific agreement concerns the trade in endangered animals and plants to fittingly prevent their disappearance.
It is the CITES, which prohibits, or at least regulates, trade in these resources according to its three appendices.
It is here particularly, that the major question of the ivory and the rhinoceros horn trades are discussed.
Let's now start the tests relating to this module.
