So in this lesson, we will now have a closer look at how ions interacting with the target material in order to remove the material from the target, and to sputter it on the substrate.
When a so called primary ion collides with a target, made of the material to deposit.
Several interactions may occur, as illustrated in the figure on the right side of the slide.
The interaction depends primarily on the ion kinetic energy, the type of ion, and the target material.
Negatively charged electrons in the cathode will then neutralize the positive ion, Argon in most cases.
When the energy is low, smaller than 10 electron volt.
Ions hitting the cathode may be reflected, absorbed, or may migrate on the surface.
During the inpinching, it can induce some surface damage such as point defect, or topographical changes.
It may also induce some chemical reactions on the surface.
Ions with high energy, 
10 kilo-electron volts or more, will penetrate deeply into the target material and form an implant or compound electron here.
When ions are in the energy range between 10eV and 10 keV, they will eject atoms from the target like the ones shown here.
This is the action that we want for sputtering.
By doing so, they will simultaneously create secondary electrons, and secondary ions.
Finding the ions interacting with the target can also result in the emission of photons and x-rays.
95% of colliding ions transmit energy as heat to the target, therefore cooling is required.
And it is worth noting that in sputtering, the deposition of compounds such as carbide, nitrite, and oxide is indeed possible, because mechanical energy is used to eject atoms from the target.
This differs significantly from the case of the thermal or electron beam evaporation where thermal energy is used to vaporize the solid target material.
So once again, on the drawing so you see here.
The target material in orange, which is biased negatively.
And the wafer in grey, that is biased, positively on ground.
And now, a primary ion, with a correct energy will hit the target material, will remove atoms from the target, which then fly through the vacuum and will land on the wafer and form the thin film of the target material.
Unlike for evaporation, the amount of material ejected from the target does not depend on the vapor pressure, but is given by the so called ejection rate, W.
The ejection rate W depends on parameters such as the sputtering yield, the voltage between the electrodes, the discharge current, as well as the pressure and the inter electrode distance.
From the equation on the left hand here on the slide, we see that the target  ejection rate increases with the voltage, but is inversely proportional to the pressure and the inter electrode distance d.
This can be explained as follows.
When increasing the voltage, argon ions are accelerated more rapidly and strike the cathode with more kinetic energy.
On the other hand, when decreasing the pressure, argon mean free path is increased.
And when decreasing the inter electrode distance, argon ions will collide with less argon, before striking the cathode.
As a consequent, argon ions impact the cathode with more kinetic energy.
Finally, the target ejection rate also depends on the sputtering yield, S.
Which is the ability of one ion of a specific gas to eject an atom from the target made of the specific material.
Obviously, the sputtering yield depends on the ion energy which itself depends on voltage, the pressure, and the distance.
But it's also related to the type of gas in the reactor, and to the target material.
In general, heavier ions usually have larger sputtering yields and harder target materials result in lower sputtering yields.
A few typical sputtering yield values for common materials are shown in the table on the right side here.
The different metals, with their corresponding sputtering yield.
So here, the target is bombarded with
500 eV argon ions.
You can see for instance that titanium sputtering yield is significantly lower than that of for example, gold.
Because titanium is much harder than gold.
As explained previously, only the target should be bombarded by energetic ions.
To avoid sputtering off other surfaces than the cathode, the anode as well as the entire chamber, is grounded to increase, in fact, the anode area.
Still, this would not be enough to prevent sputtering on the backside of the cathode.
Indeed, when all the walls of the chamber are grounded, a plasma will still install between the 2 electrodes as wanted.
But also between the walls and the backside of the cathode as shown here, on the top left image.
In this case, energetic argon plus ions, shown here in blue, will also sputter the backside of the cathode and deteriorate it.
To prevent sputtering of the structural elements of the cathode, a grounded shield, is placed at the distance less than that of the plasma shield as shown here on the lower right illustration.
In this way, the space between the shield and the cathode is too small to allow plasma formation and the plasma is contained in front of the target.
In order to create a plasma, a certain amount of gas molecules is required between their electrodes.
Consequently,
The pressure at which the deposition in a sputtering system occurs, is higher than that used for thermal or electron beam evaporation.
We use typically
10 to the minus one, to 10 to the minus 3 tau for sputtering, instead of 10 to the minus 6 to 10 to the minus 7 tau for evaporation.
As a result, the mean free path in sputtering is only a few millimeters compared to meters in evaporation.
Atoms ejected from the target will therefore collide with many gas particles, and ions, before reaching the substrate.
You do the multiple collisions.
The atoms inpinch on the surface with random incident angles.
Shown here, with the yellow arrows on this cartoon.
Thus the way atoms deposit onto the substrate and the film grow is different from evaporation.
For instance, having random incident angle allows having better step coverage.
Compared to evaporation, where a long mean free path produces a line of sight deposition with a possible shadowing effect, as you may remember from the evaporation lesson.
Adding a reactive gas in the chamber, reactive sputtering is possible.
Atoms ejected from the target react with the gas, for instance oxygen, and forms compounds such as oxides.
Another deposition technique to deposit compounds is called co-sputtering.
Finally, if needed, the direction in a sputtering deposition is possible by using a collimated sputtering.
It's done by placing a grid in between the electrodes and thus filtering atoms with high angles of incidence.
So on this micro graph, taken by an electron microscope.
You can see an example showing the capability of sputtering aluminum on a double layer lift-off resist.
So you see here, 2 layers of photo-resist with an over hanging geometry like a small mushroom that has been coated by sputtering aluminum.
And since the aluminum came under various angles, it was able to deposit also underneath the mushroom.
If I'm drawing here again, where we see the aluminum on the mushroom structure.
The top, then also here, we have again aluminum that has been deposited.
Only just underneath the over hanging structure, there have been no, or non visible deposition of aluminum because the incoming angles were for the aluminum.
Atoms could not reach this shadow part.
So let's have a look at how various parameters influence the sputter film quality.
Increasing the voltage results in more energetic ions striking the cathode.
Consequently, more atoms and more energetic atoms are ejected from the target which leads to higher deposition rate, and better film adhesion.
Indeed, more energetic atoms have a longer penetrating depth at the wafer surface, and also allow cleaning the wafer surface from remaining contaminants.
Adjusting the pressure, and the inter electrode distance is a question of trade off.
As explained previously, 
Paschen's law gives the breakdown voltage as a function of the product between the pressure and inter electrode distance.
Thus, for a fixed voltage changing either the pressure, or the inter electrode distance will alter the plasma stability.
In addition, increasing the pressure or the inter electrode distance leads to more collisions of the atoms on their travel between the target and the substrate.
As a result, less atoms and less energetic atoms will deposit on the substrate which will lower the deposition rate and also the film adhesion.
There's also risk for contamination of the deposited hin film by argon atoms from the plasma if the pressure is too high.
Too high pressure and large inter electrode distance, should thus be avoided.
Finally, the pressure also impacts the morphology of the deposited thin film.
If it is an amorphous, or forms crystal.
This point will be traded in more details in the lesson about film growth.
The substrate temperature is another controlled parameter.
Increasing the substrate temperature, increases atom energy on the surface and thus improves the diffusion.
This leads to better film uniformity and adhesion, and lower internal stresses.
The temperature also impacts the crystal structure as it will be explained in the film growth chapter.
One of the main advantages of sputtering over thermal evaporation is stability to deposit almost any kind of material including metallic, and non metallic elements, alloys, ceramics, and polymers.
In addition,
Reactive and co-sputtering enables the deposition of oxides and chemical compounds such as nitrites, and carbides, among others as depicted in this table here on the right side.
In addition to the wide choice of material to deposit, sputtering ensures a good adhesion of the deposited thin film because of the relatively high kinetic energy of the atoms when they inpinch on the substrate.
Due to the non directional nature of sputtering, which means atoms arrive on the substrate with random (INAUDIBLE) of the incident.
This deposition technique enables good step coverage, good uniformity over large areas, and suppresses shadowing problems typically of thermal evaporation.
Sputtering targets can be relatively large and thick, which allows to deposit more material than with evaporation.
Sputtering systems are compatible with production processes as large amount of material can be uniformly deposited over large areas.
In addition, sputtering systems can be adapted to (INAUDIBLE) deposition to it.
Finally, surface cleaning and activation is possible with the process called sputter etching.
Reversing the electrode's polarity and creating a low energetic plasma sill result in ions colliding on the substrate.
As a result, these ions will remove contamination layers or particles on the surface, break oxide and surface bonds to activate the surface.
Dry cleaning process using a plasma is less efficient than wet cleaning but has no surface tension effects, doesn't require any drying step, and is performed directly in the chamber where the deposition will take place.
In practice, a cleaning step is very common before starting the sputtering process.
Sputtering can be done at room temperature, but unless used with magnetron, substrate heating is substantial because of the atom's kinetic energy and bombardment by secondary electrons.
Chemical reaction between the substrate and the deposited layer can start.
In addition, surface damage can also occur because of the substrate cooling system the setup and material change is more complex than the thermal evaporation system.
And thus the sputtering equipment is more expensive.
Finally, due to the high deposition pressure, it is difficult to have high purity films.
