This lesson on the growth of thin films in physical vapor deposition presents the basic parameter that influence the morphology of the added material on the substrate.
I will start by describing what happens when the atoms arrive on the surface
An important factor here is the interface property which determines the adhesion of the added film as well as the way the film actually grows.
I will then show the various growth modes influence, on their turn, the crystal structure of the film, and will conclude with some remarks on the mechanical stresses in the thin films.
Thin film deposition and film growth depend on the materials involved as well as on several process parameters.
These include the energy of the impinging atoms their arrival rate and the substrate temperature.
When atoms condensate on the substrate they are adsorbed and attached to the surface either by chemisorption or by physisorption.
In the first case, atoms create chemical bonds to the surface with the bonding energy in the order of 1 electronvolt (eV).
The available energy depends on impinging atoms energy as well as on substrate temperature.
On the other hand, physisorption occurs when there is a chemistry mismatch or when the energy is too low to create chemical bonds and which leaves the chemical species of the adsorbate and the surface in tact.
In other words, there is no chemical reaction occurring.
Physisorbed atoms are weakly attached to the surface by van der Waals forces, with the bonding energy in the order of 0.3 to 0.5 eV.
As a result, physisorbed atoms can diffuse on the surface.
And diffusion of physisorbed atoms, increases with the available energy but is inversely proportional to the atom's arrival rate.
Why is that so?
The explanation is as follows:
If the arrival rate is high, atoms on the surface will rapidly collide with new arriving atoms.
And this limits the diffusion and strongly influences the growth mode.
Growth modes are detailed later in this chapter.
Here on the figure you can see various events that can occur after the arrival of the atoms on the surface.
As a result of this surface diffusion physisorbed atoms will either bind at the kink
- shown here, a small step - or at the defect. 
Shown here.
Or nucleate with other atoms and form clusters.
Nucleation is increased with available surface energy.
Finally, if the atom's energy is high enough, they can also desorb again from the surface.
The likelihood of desorption is lower for clustered atoms in comparison to single atoms.
Once there are enough atoms on the substrate surface the film starts growing.
A very important parameter here is the interface stability.
Or in other words, the question whether the layer will adhere to the substrate or not.
Thermodynamics allows determining if the atoms will be chemisorbed on the surface or not.
So if the change in Gibbs energy which is given by the
Gibbs energy of the product minus the Gibbs energy of the reactants is smaller than zero then the reaction is possible.
Let us take the example of titania on SiO2.
So the Gibbs free energy is the product Gibbs free energy of TiO2 minus Gibbs of SiO2 which is, in numerical values known to be 
160 minus 165 Kcal, which is minus 5 Kcal which is smaller than zero, for this reaction can happen.
It means we can deposit titania on SiO2.
Another material of interest may be cobalt.
Depositing cobalt on silicon is also possible.
As a corresponding
Gibbs free energy calculation would show.
But the deposition of cobalt on SiO2 is not possible as the ∆ G is larger than zero.
Thus the cobalt deposition on silicon is very sensitive to the presence of native oxides.
Besides the initial interface stability criteria different types of interfaces exist.
An abrupt interface, shown here, is encountered in most
PVD and CVD depositions.
And which produces an almost-ideally sharp material transmission.
However, if the goal is to grow a thin film directly on silicon, this is not as straightforward as it sounds; because without special precaution, silicon is often covered by a few nanometer-thick native SiO2 layer.
In this case, an interfacial layer exists between the substrate and the added film.
Shown here.
To remove the interfacial SiO2 layer typically a special surface etching and cleaning has to be done priorly, to the deposition.
So in some other cases, for instance, during the deposition of copper on silicon dioxide, the added copper atoms diffuse into the substrate.
Chemical reactions between the thin film and the wafer may also occur.
This is the case of nickel, cobalt and titanium deposition on silicon which forms a so-called
"Silly Side" at 400°, 500° and 600° C, respectively.
There is a reaction going on at the interface.
In some cases, an annealing step is sufficient to ensure a good electrical conductivity between the added thin film and the silicon.
See the case of the pitted interface, for example.
This is the case of silicon in aluminum when heated over 425° C.
The spikes of the film into the wafer can be several micrometers deep.
On the positive side, they allow for better electrical contact between aluminum and silicon and is even able to break through this thin native silicon dioxide interface that we have presented here before.
The adhesion of the added thin film to the substrate is a very important issue in microfabrication and special attention is therefore required.
Particularly, substrate cleanliness is of a major significance as residues from the environment or from previous process steps will almost inevitably lead to poor adhesion. 
The thin film deposition process itself also plays a role if there is a strong or weak adhesion.
For instance, in sputtering, highly energetic ions and atoms knock out surface contamination and loosely bound atoms.
This enhances the adhesion a lot.
Thus, sputtered films tend to have a better adhesion compared to films formed by evaporation.
However, as explained in the previous slide sometimes it is not possible to grow a thin film of a desired material directly on the given substrate because of thermodynamics. 
Examples are the cases of noble metals, which are inert and do not react by nature.
As a result, they do not adhere well to silicon or SiO2.
So, what to do?
To deposit noble metals, adhesion layers are therefore required.
These adhesion layers, which are chosen according to their ability to make chemical bonds, consist of few nanometers-thick films deposited just before the noble metal, in the same vacuum chamber.
This ensures that we have a clean interface and substrate.
Two common pairs of adhesion noble materials in micro and nano fabrication are titania and platinum as well as chrome and gold.
Here is the example that shows the silicon substrate with the chrome adhesion layer, and then the deposited gold, that is now well-adhering to the substrate.
This photo here, on the right side, actually shows a failure process.
A 500 nm thick chrome layer aimed as electrical conductor to drive current with bimorph actuator has poor adhesion to the substrate, and is detached, or delaminated, how we call it, from the substrate.
You can see this in this optical microscope
This is either due to poor adhesion, and/or to high intrinsic stress,
 both.
This will eventually lead to the complete failure of the device and needs to be overcome.
To test thin film adhesion a first, straightforward test called the "tape-pull test", can be performed.
A standard office tape is attached to the wafer and then pulled off.
If the film peels off with the tape, then adhesion is not good enough, and process or adhesion layer should be modified.
In the second example, we added 10 nm chrome, between the silicone nitrate and the added 100 nm of gold film, and as you can see, now the gold film adheres very well, under the tape-pull test.
There are, of course, more sophisticated equipment that measure the adhesion of thin films.
But for first order information, this tape-test is very convenient.
Now let us have a closer look how the thin film grow classify the modes, and identify the important parameters
 on which this depends.
The 2D, or layer-by-layer mode, also called 
Frank - van der Merwe mode, occurs when the adatoms, here in orange, bond more strongly with the substrate than with other atoms and when they have enough energy and time to diffuse around to the energetic minimum location.
This is the case in ALD,
MBE, and also PLD.
Here, we have a relatively slow growth rate, so that the atoms have time to rearrange themselves before the atoms for the second layer are coming.
The second growth mode is the 3D, or island mode.
Also called,
Volmer - Weber Mode.
It typically occurs during the deposition of metal atoms onto an insulator, since bonds between metal atoms are stronger than bonds between insulator and metal atoms.
In the island mode, surface atoms have enough energy and time to diffuse around but not as much as in the 2D mode; because the growth rate is higher than the previous case.
As a result, a few surface atoms nuclei together and form clusters, or islands.
At some point, islands merge together, and a uniform film.
For films formed by sputtering and evaporation, a continuous thin film forms at around 10 to 20 nm thickness.
Before this threshold value the film does yet not cover the entire surface.
Island more typically occurs with sputtering deposition or with evaporation when the substrate is heated.
A mixed mode, combining 2D and 3D mode also exists.
It is then called the Stranski - Krastanov mode.
Finally, when the surface atoms' energy and mobility is low, atoms stick where they land, and islands are not able to merge together.
In this last mode, which is called the columnar mode, grains grow upwards and voids between the grains can remain.
Columnar mode typically takes place when the deposition is performed
 at room temperature.
The growth mode determines the way in which the film forms.
For us as users, what is more important is actually the resulting film intrinsic structure.
It plays a key role for many physical properties of the thin film.
Such as electrical band structure, conductivity, hardness, transparency, and piezoelectric properties.
The first important question to ask is, if the film is amorphous polycrystalline or monocrystalline?
As a rule of thumb, thin films made of silicon covalently bonding materials, compounds and alloys are often amorphous
If no special precaution is taken during the deposition.
Metals, on the other side, are often polycrystalline. 
In order to grow monocrystalline films very special deposition techniques, such as MBE or PLD, are required.
However, it is sometimes difficult to predict the exact structure of the thin film, as it depends on so many several parameters.
Such as the material itself, the deposition method, and the process.
In case of sputtering of metals, for instance, a well-known model, called the Thornton's Zone model shown here, can be used.
It shows in empirical diagrams the morphology of thin films as a function of the chamber pressure, shown here on this axis, and the substrate temperature (T).
Normalized by the melting temperature of the thin film (Tm), shown here.
Sputtered metal thin films have a poorly crystalline structure.
At high pressure, or low temperature,
(zone one), atoms do not have much energy to diffuse around.
Which results in columnar grains.
We see them here.
Usually this leads to porous films with tensile stress unless oxygen is present in the chamber, which leads to compressed stress in the film. 
At lower pressure and higher temperature impinging atoms are more energetic and can knock out loosely attached atoms, and diffuse on the surface.
This results in denser films with compressive stress.
Simultaneously, the film grain structure moves from zone 1 to the zone T, for transition, and zone 2, where the grains are larger.
At some point, if the temperature is further increased the film's crystal structure reaches zone 3, where annealing occurs, and the film loses memory of the deposition process, as it is called in technical terms,
In the case of sputtered aluminum, typical grain size can go up to 0.5 µm and can be in the order of the film thickness.
Processes which depend on grain boundaries such as diffusion and electromigration, are strongly affected by the ratio between grain size and the characteristic dimensions of the thin film in the microdevice.
For some materials, the film crystal structure does not change continuously as described in Thornton's zone model.
Instead, it changes abruptly due to a phased change occurring at specific temperatures.
An example of such a material is tantalum.
Finally, it is relevant to note that the texture of the added thin film is inherited from the underlying film.
Seed layers are, therefore, often used to obtain a validifying crystal orientation on the subsequent deposition of a thicker film.
You will remember
the case study of the bimorph actuated that we saw in one of the introduction lessons of this book.
After the (INAUDIBLE) release of the beams the cantilevers did not remain flat,
 but were bent upwards.
This is due to residual stress in the thin films resulting from the different process steps.
Let's now have a more extensive look at the different kinds of stress that exist in the thin films, and to their origin.
As mentioned in the previous slide, the deposition method and the process parameters influence the crystal structure of the thin film.
In addition, they also influence the residual stress in the thin films.
Stress in thin films can be divided in two categories:
Extrinsic stress and Intrinsic stress.
Extrinsic stress results from a mismatch between the film and the substrate's coefficient of thermal expansion, 
CTE.
If both the film and the substrate undergo the same temperature difference a simple formula, shown here, describes the stress which is directly proportional to the difference between the two expansion coefficients and to the change in temperature.
Such a situation occurs, for instance, during cooling after a CVD process.
Indeed, during CVD, the film and the substrate are at the same elevated temperature.
By convention, a negative stress is compressive and generally extrinsic stresses are uniform over the film thickness.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that most materials used in microfabrication have a higher CTE value than silicon except SiO2, silicon nitrate, and diamond.
On the other hand, intrinsic stress is less understood.
There is no simple theory that allows computing them.
The understanding relies on empirical results.
Intrinsic stress is closely related to the film material, and microstructure, as well as to the deposition method and parameters.
For instance, a lattice mismatch between the film and the substrate, or the incorporation of voids and foreign atoms generate intrinsic stress.
On the contrary, bombarding the substrate during the deposition pinches of loosely attached atoms which can reduce stress.
And intrinsic stress is not uniform over the film thickness.
Which creates stress gradience.
These gradients are inducing the banding of cantilevers.
Even if they are made of a single layer material.
Intrinsic stress can be partially removed by means of an annealing step.
The total stress in a thin film is equal to the sum of the extrinsic and the intrinsic stress.
Usually films deposited by evaporation result in tensile stress.
Stress in sputtered films depend on many parameters, such as bias power, or argon pressure, sputtering gas masks, substrate temperature and deposition rate.
As a guideline, sputtering at low pressure at about 1 millitorr usually results in compressive stress.
While sputtering at higher pressure,
10 millitorr, usually results in tensile stress.
Depositing sequential layers with tensile and compressive stress enables to perform stress compensation.
Residual stress in thin films leads to substrate or device curvature.
To qualitatively understand why, let's consider the schematics on the top left corner of this slide.
This is the case corresponding to an extrinsic tensile stress.
If a thin film, here in yellow, is deposited by operation on a substrate, here in grey, at room temperature, for instance, the film, which is initially hot shrinks more relatively to the substrate, which is cold.
However, the lateral dimension of the substrate and of the thin film have to be the same.
Therefore, film is under tensile stress while the substrate is under compressor stress.
Shown here, in this second line of the drawing.
To satisfy the sum of the force's equilibrium, the tensile force in the film is equal to the compressive force in the substrate.
However, the mechanical equilibrium is not satisfied yet; because the sum of the moment.
Thus, the wafer and the film bend in a concave way, for the case of tensile thin films.
Indeed, the film tends to retrieve its shorter, unstressed state.
In the case of compressive thin films, in the top right corner, the same reasoning leads to convex bending of the film.
It is worth to notice that if a wafer with a thin film were manually bent, a tensile stress in the thin film would occur in the case of a convex shape.
It is the opposite, then, for residual stresses.
Tensile stress in thin films leads to cracks while compressive stress leads to buckling.
The well-known Stoney equation quantitatively relates the way a curvature to the residual stress is in the thin film.`
By measuring the radius of curvature of the wafer before and after the film deposition and knowing the substrate and film thicknesses, it is possible to compute the average stress in the thin film.
Here we see 2 SEM images showing 2 different cantilever arrays.
In both cases, we have free-standing SiO2 films,
1.1 µm thick grown by thermal oxidation at 1050° C.
They are between 40 and 200 µm long.
The bilayer microcantilevers
were obtained after an additional Ti (left) and Al (right) that was deposited onto the SiO2 cantilevers. 
The Al films with thicknesses
ranging from 0.3 to 1.7 µm were deposited using thermal evaporation.
In addition, the titanium films were with thickness ranging from 0.1 to 0.3 µm were deposited using electron beam evaporation.
The SEM images here show the bilayer microcantilever array and their respective bending due to  intrinsic stress.
In the case of titanium, it bends upwards, and in the case of aluminum it bends downwards.
In both cases, we have SiO2,
S material plus titanium.
And here we have the SiO2 plus the aluminum.
So we can obtain different types of stresses in free-standing cantilevers, by playing with different material compositions.
In this chapter we first saw that depending on the chemistry, that the deposition method and the process parameters, atoms can either be chemisorbed or physisorbed at the wafer surface.
Once arrived on the surface the atoms stay, move or desorb.
Once the film starts to grow, an important parameter is to film substrate interface.
Will the film adhere or not?
To answer this question, thermodynamics allows computing interface stability and several types of different interfaces were shown in this lesson. 
We have seen that all following factors influence the thin film adhesion:
Interface compatibility, substrate cleanness and deposition method, as well as adhesion layers.
Film growth can be categorized into different modes, which are 2D, 3D and columnar modes.
These modes, as well as the resulting film crystal structure are strongly dependent on the deposited material, the deposition method, as well as on the process parameters.
There is no general theory that allows determining the final crystal structure of a thin film.
Some empirical data can sometimes be used, but most of the time, trial and error method is required. 
Finally, as a signature of the deposition method and process parameters, residual stress in thin film was also studied.
Extrinsic stress is differentiated from intrinsic stress, and the final total average stress in a thin film can be related to the ranges of curvature of the wafer using the Stoney equation.
With this lesson, we close the chapter on physical vapor deposition.
