Hello, welcome to this last module of the fifth chapter of the course of fluid mechanics. A fifth chapter that deals with the kinematics, i.e. the description of the fluids' motions without worrying about the forces being them. In this course of kinematics, the fourth module will deal more precisely with the general classification of flows in the vicinity of a point. We will thus look at the flow in the vicinity of a point by zooming and locally describing in a very general way the geometry of the flow or the topology of the flow. In this classification of the velocity fields, we will introduce in particular a concept very important which is the vorticity that describes the proper rotation of particles in the flow. As we have just said, the velocity field in the vicinity of a point x can be expanded by a simple asymptotic development or in proper English a Taylor expansion. As u is actually a vector and as x is also a vector, the derivative is not a scalar, it is not a vector but it is simply a tensor, the gradient of the velocity field consisting of 9 components, i.e. the variation of u in the direction x with respect to x, the variation of v the velocity along y...  This gradient of the velocity field that I can maybe write here ∇u is nothing more than du/dx,du/dy, du/dz, dv/dx, dv/dy, dv/dz, dw/dx, dw/dy, dw/dz can be in general way decomposed in a symmetric part and an antisymmetric part, we can always do this. The symmetric part that is expressed simply as the half-sum of ∇u and of (∇u)^T called the strain rate tensor, it has a key role in the constitutive law of a Newtonian fluid.
The antisymmetric part, here represented in blue and often noted Ω is half the difference between the tensor of velocity gradient and its transpose. We can decompose the symmetric part in a more systematic way in two pieces: S which is the diagonal part and T which is a part that does not have elements on the diagonal, which is a part of trace null, that is the most general decomposition that we can do for the tensor of velocity gradient. It is the sum of these two terms that constitute the strain rate tensor. Be careful, here many of you may say that you have made a mistake, that you did not choose a course of algebra, no, this algebraic decomposition is in fact very relevant from a geomtrical point of view.
I will try here to illustrate it for you. I am considering the most general motion in a point x of a particle that we represent square shaped. The point x is moving at a velocity u(x) and the neighboring points are moving with velocities slightly different, and it is in fact the gradient of the velocity field that is telling me how the neighboring points of x are transported at a velocity that looks like u(x) but that is slightly different. Hence, the transformation of this square particle in a particle of different shape can be simply approached in asymptotic terms, i.e. when the particle is small, it can be in fact approached by the superposition of 4 effects, the first one is of course the translation at the velocity u(x), so actually, the particle centered in x at time 0, when it is moving of a quantity u(x)dt, it is essentially moving according to a translation motion. Meaning that the neighboring points will also be subjected to this translation. But, it is not all, due to the antisymmetric part of the tensor of velocity gradient, there will be also a rotation. This rotation is executed without expansion, i.e. the area is conserved and without deformation i.e. the angles of the particle are conserved. It is a part purely rotational.
There will also be an part of pure expansion that corresponds to the diagonal part of the velocity gradient, which will expand the particle without changing the angles, and it is this part of which we can show that, for an incompressible fluid, we will see this in chapter 6, that for an incompressible fluid this part is null, there is no possible expansion for a fluid that cannot be compressed or that cannot be expanded. And then a part t which is a part associated to the deformation but which is a part of trace null. This deformation is done without rotation of the particle and without variation of the area, here because I am in 2 dimensions or without variation of volume for a particle in three dimensions. This decomposition is completely general, i.e in each point of the flow we can always decompose the velocity field as the sum of a translation, which is the velocity at the considered point, a rotation, which tends to make the particles turn on themselves, an expansion and a deformation. If I take the example of Newton's flow between a fixed wall and a moving wall, the pure shear is the sum of an effect of rotation and an effect of deformation without expansion. This decomposition is completely general and it gives a good geometric vision of what can happen in a flow. Now,
I will be interested more specifically at the antisymmetric part Ω. A result from algebra demonstrates that the application of a antisymmetric tensor that has only three information as there are
0 on the diagonal and that the non-diagonal elements of the lower part are the opposite of the non-diagonal elements of the upper part. The operation of this antisymmetric tensor in 3 dimensions can be represented or re-expressed as the cross product of a vector containing these 3 informations multiplied by the vector on which we apply the tensor.
When I apply here the tensor Ω to the tensor
δx, I obtain exactly the same result than if I apply the cross product between a vector called the vorticity or more exactly 1/2*the vorticity ^ δx, you remember what the cross product is, the cross product is a formula, so
I do not have to recall here what a cross product is. The big question that we ask ourselves, is how to obtain this vector, how from the tensor here antisymmetric is it possible to obtain the vorticity vector
Ω which will actually be taken in a cross product with δx to obtain the same result.
There is a very simple formula that links
Ω to the velocity field, Ω as I have said is called the vorticity, this formula is simply Ω equals curl of u, what is the curl? The curl is simply the operator that uses ∇ by doing a cross product. I write ∇ : ∂/∂x, ∂/∂y and ∂/∂z that I apply to u, v and w. By doing as such, I obtain, if I look for example at the first component,
I obtain simply  ∂w/∂y - ∂v/∂x, you recognize the first element
I needed to express the action of the tensor
Ω. I can do for example another case, let's take the component along z, if I want to calculate the component along z of this cross product, it will simply make me ∂v/∂x
- ∂u/∂y, and this ∂v/∂x - ∂u/∂y, is in fact ∂v/∂x - ∂u/∂y. There, it is a way a little algebraic of introducing
Ω but what is the physical meaning of the vorticity
ω ? The physical meaning of the vorticity is the following: In a rotational motion where the vorticity rot(u) is different from
0, the particles turn on themselves.
However, when the motion on is irrotational, it means the curl of u is equal to 0, the particle in its motion is not turning on itself. I will give you an example to better understand this by simply looking at what happens in vortices. Vortices, are flows characterized in particular by the streamlines nearly circular, concentric that I have represented here. And here is a well-known vortex which is the rigid rotation vortex.
In the rigid rotation vortex, the velocity uθ is simply proportional to the radius, the more I deviate from the radius center, the more
I turn fast. It is exactly what happens when I put a solid in rotation.
In this case, I can simply calculate the vorticity. I have to be a little careful, as the flow is plane, the vorticity will have a non-zero component only along the ez axis which is perpendicular to the flow plane, that is the first thing to have in mind. The second thing is that I must be careful as I cannot simply write ∇uθ as
I am working in orthoradial coordinates r and θ and in this case there are metric terms and so the expression of the vorticity is this one, i.e. it is not simply ∂uθ / ∂r but it is 1/r.∂ruθ / ∂r, this is due to the change of coordinates, I am in an orthoradial coordinate system. Let's apply this formula, I obtain 1/r.∂Cr^2 / ∂r, which gives me in fact 2r/r.C, the areas are gone and I obtain the vorticity which is constant equal to 2C, what this means is that if I take particles that are here on a concentric line relatively to the outside of the vortex, these are turning of a certain quantity given by
2C and so it is a rotational motion and if I take a particle on a smaller concentric circle, they are turning exactly in the same way as the vorticity here is constant in the vortex. Another vortex well-known model is the point vortex. In the case of the point vortex, this time the velocity is hyperbolic so it is a constant C/r, in this case, I apply again the formula and find that ω is simply 
1/r.∂r(C/r) / ∂r, the r are counterbalanced, the derivative of a constant with respect to r is 0, and so I obtain simply 0. This vortex which really looks like a vortex as it has streamlines concentric and circular, is actually a vortex associated to an irrotational motion, the particles are not turning on themselves, although they are turning around the center of the vortex. You must be really really careful when we are talking about rotation in a flow, there is the proper rotation of particles linked to the vorticity and the center of rotation around which the pathlines, streamlines in stationary flows, are are simply circular or in  any case concentric and quasi circular, be careful to this difference.
In the reality, a vortex is neither a vortex with a rigid core filled with vorticity, nor an irrotational vortex with a hyperbolic profile of velocity uθ(r), it is in fact in general the mixture of both with a core in rigid rotation and an irrotational external region, with a velocity profile of uθ that increases linearly in r in the region still solid and that decreases non-linearly in 1/r in the part called potential at the outside of the vortex core. It is what we can see here for example in a vortex of a drain obtained simply by draining a liquid through a small cylindric hole in a cylindric container.
