Welcome back. Nature, In Code. 
We're in chapter six, lecture one.
Chapter six is all about natural selection.
Natural selection has been dubbed the best idea anyone has ever had.
 A statement I do agree with.
Natural selection often equated with evolution, but as you now know, this is not entirely true because as we've seen, there are other forces that can affect allele frequencies.
But nevertheless, natural selection does stand out so much so that people do equate it with evolution.
So why is that? Let's find out.
Natural selection is the only force capable of producing adaptive traits. 
So what is an adaptive trait?
Well, an adaptive trait is one that makes the individual with that trait well adapted to the environment it lives in.
But again, what does that actually mean? We have a good sense of you know, of being adapted but what does it mean in the evolutionary context?
Well it simply means that all else being equal an individual with the trait is more likely to survive and produce offspring than individuals without the trait.
So you take individuals that are identical, everything about them, their situation, the environment, everything is exactly identical except some of the individuals have that trait and some of them don't have it
If that trait, having that trait means that these individuals are more likely to survive and produce offspring, then we're talking about an adaptive trait.
So I'm going to give you an example. 
Natural selection produces stunning adaptations and this is one of the most stunning I personally know of, but there are many, many more.
This is an example of mimicry.
So here if you look closely, you can see an insect.
This is a leaf katydid and it's perhaps a little bit hard to see on first sight, but here you have the legs, six legs, the head, the antenna, and here are the wings.
And this here is a leaf, but this is not a leaf.
This is actually part of animal, part of the insect, really a stunning adaptation here. 
Clearly something like this cannot come about through random genetic drift or mutation alone.
So the force that can create something like this is that of adaptation through natural selection, because just as you
had a hard time perhaps recognizing this image of the first sight.
Now, imagine you are a bird flying over a forest say you would have a very hard time seeing this type insect.
And so you would miss out on launch here, which is bad for you as a bird, but it is very good for the fitness of this individual.
So let's think about how this could play out and I'm not just obviously going to over simplify a lot, but the model
 is the correct one.
So imagine now, okay, we would have a forest.
This would be the forest from a bird's eye view.
And now we would have a bunch of katydids and let's in the beginning, they happen to have yellow wings.
And so here are a bunch of yellow of yellow
 katydids.
And so as you can see, the birds will find it relatively easy to see those insects, and would have found it very easy you know, to go hunt them and basically eat them for launch.
Now, imagine a mutation comes along one day a katydid produces offspring and its offspring has a genetic mutation, and that genetic mutation affects the leaf coloring in such a way that it is now green. 
Now this katydid is harder to see.
It's not impossible but all else being equal, this is harder to see.
So when the birds come along and start eating and start feasting on some of these katydids, this one is much less likely to be eaten. 
So, you know a few others would be eaten.
The remaining ones will go ahead and reproduce and to create offspring and so of course, does the green one.
Now, in the next generation again, the birds come along and start eating some of these katydids, and again, they would predominantly eat the yellow ones because they are much easier to find.
And then when reproduction time comes along, again, we have you know, the yellow katydids reproducing but we also have the green ones reproducing. 
And you can already see what's happening here.
So already, the frequency of the responsible mutation here, this new allele that contributes to this green color has increased in frequency, which in other words means that evolution has occurred by our definition. 
But in this case, this wasn't due to genetic drift, but this was due to natural selection, because this particular allele, the bearer, the individuals with that allele are more likely to survive and reproduce than the ones without the allele. And that is then according to our definition natural selection.
Now, from a genetic perspective so far in our model world, right, we have assumed these two alleles, A1 and A2, but for all intense purposes, these two alleles were considered
equal in terms of their effects they have on the bearers.
There was no effect in terms of reproducing, in terms of surviving given by one of those alleles.
They were considered equal.
So in other words, another ways to express this is that their evolutionary fitness was equal.
Their ability to survive and reproduce which is what fitness is,
was equal. And by the way this is not an absolute value.
This is always relative to what else is around, but their fitness, their ability to reproduce and survive was equal
Now, this chapter is very special in one, a key assumption which is that we now make this assumption that this is not true anymore, and when this is not true anymore, then you have natural selection.
At the moment when alleles have different fitnesses, that's when natural selection occurs.
And I want to do something now very straight forward.
I want to go to code that we've already produced, where the implicit assumption was that the alleles had the exact same fitness. We're going to make a small modification in the code that leads to those two alleles not having the same fitness anymore, and then we'll see what happens as a consequence.
All right, what would like you to do is to open this file genetic drift or the HTML that we developed early in chapter three.
So I already have it opened here but you should just simply find it under the code examples. 
Here it's called genetic drift.
That's the file. Simply open it.
I already have it open so here it is.
And if you open this in the browser, you may recall that we ended the genetic drift chapter.
Let's do this here as well, open file, code examples, genetic drift.
We ended it with the bottle necks, and so that's why it takes a second or so to load. It's because we have a very large population outside of the bottle necks and that's why it takes so long.
So this is our genetic drift simulation where we left off
 in chapter three.
Now go back to the code and so let's now get rid of these bottle necks.
So first of all, let's store these files here under a new version, so we're going to save this as-- in code examples. I'm going to call this drift and selection.html. 
All right, so once you have saved this, remove the bottle necks, so these lines here, these six lines where we set the population size
to 10 or otherwise to N, let's remove these so we don't have bottle necks anymore.
And also be sure here to set the population size to N and this is just going to be fixed in this case.
All right, the other thing that we should do is we should go up to the global variables and set your N back to something more reasonable. Let's say 2,000 and you know, we can maybe do this for 200 generations.
All right, so let's save this and open this again in the browser.
So we already have the file open but it is now a different file.
It's now called drift up, drifts and selection HMO.
You can open it from the menu or you can just type is her
 in the address bar.
And this is now what we expect.
This is of course our average standard genetic drift simulation and if I repeat this a couple of times.
You've seen this over and over again in chapter three.
This is the typical drift dynamic.
You have the alleles that start to you know, change in frequency go up or down simple due to a random sampling effect
And you can also see here that 
200 generations is by no means enough to get rid of one of the alleles or have one of the alleles go to fixation rather. 
But we now know that this will eventually happen if we gave it enough time.
All right, so this is genetic drift. 
We know about genetic drift.
Now, let's go back to the code and implement a very small change.
So here we're back in the code, now we will like to implement natural selection here. 
So how are we going to do this?
Well, it turns out that we only have to change a single line and the money is here, so this is in the next generation function, and this is the line that says if math random is smaller or equal to P. So here we pick A1 alleles based on their frequency, and as you now know, that also means, you know due to these lines here else  you know, we pick an A2 allele also means that we pick an A2 allele simply based on its frequency.
So that means we have no natural selection because we are simply picking these alleles based on their frequencies.
So these two alleles, they are selectively neutral.
They have the exact same fitness. 
None has an advantage over the other.
We simply pick them according to their frequency.
But now let's modify this ever so lightly.
Let's just go ahead here and write if this is smaller or equal to P times 1.01.
So this is a seemingly small change, certainly a very small change
in terms of code, but it will have a huge effect.
So save this code, just save the document, go back to the browser, take a good look at this, okay.
So this is genetic drift alone and now reload this document and boom.
Very different outcome, very different outcome and this is natural selection.
So let's reload here a couple of times and they will always look the same. Of course, we'll have a little bit of variation, but the dynamics are always the same.
Within a couple of generations, 
60, 80 generations, the A1 allele will go to fixation
So very, very different outcome based a tiny change in the code.
So let's go back to the code and take a closer look at this change.
So what does this change do?
We are now picking-- we are simply picking the A1 allele a little bit more often at then based on its
frequency alone. Ever so slightly, in fact, only 1% more often than we would do based on its frequency alone.
As a consequence we would choose to pick the A2 allele slightly less frequently than we would base on its frequency alone.
And that is exactly what selection means, so we now give this a preferential
 treatment so to speak.
We select this preferentially. 
And in other words what this now means, because we have here our survival and reproduction built into one simple step. These alleles now have a slight fitness advantage
 over these alleles. 
So A1 has now a slightly higher fitness and it is at a selective advantage. And that even though it's a very small advantage
has a tremendously large effect as you saw in the browser.
So if we go back to the browser we can see here that the lines
The frequencies are sometimes still going down and then going up and so on. 
Why is that?
Well, it is because we now drift and the natural selection, so both forces are acting at the same time.
And this is something that you commonly observe because populations are always finite in reality and so you will always have this effect of genetic drift.
However, as you can see here the effect of natural selection completely overwhelms the effect of genetic drift in this case.
So in the real world, it's often very interesting to look at these effects in combination. Now, we could create and we will create a model where we have an infinite population size, where we will have no genetic drift effects, and then we will simply see these straight lines, and they
will always be exactly identical because you can then mathematically precisely predict what these trajectories look like. He we still have sort of the stochastic effect
 of genetic drift.
Now, I just said here, okay, so in this example, natural selection clearly is the dominating force, but that doesn't necessarily needs
to be the case. In fact, if we go back to the code and start and start the simulation here, another P05, but you know lets go back to the code and maybe lets set this in fact to P.1.
So let's say the frequency in the beginning of the A1 allele is 10%. 
So let's say this. 
Let's go back to the browser.
Let's reload this.
So similar dynamics, right, is very clear that these alleles will eventually all go into these simulations.
The A1 allele will always go to fixation here in these simulation runs.
It does happen though with more uncertainty as you can see
 here in this line. 
This line somehow seems to be
 going down for quite a while. 
It doesn't quite crash, but this could potentially happen. 
So the effects of drift even though they are small here, they can have the effect that we can actually lose this allele before a natural selection can really fully kick in.
Let's reload this a couple of times and now you have less here, but as you can see this here very closer, very close to extinction.
This could have eventually happened here. This could eventually happen. Well, doesn't happen. 
Oh, very close to extinction. 
You know let's go back to the code and set this to a slightly lower value. 
Let's set this here to .05.
Okay, go back to the browser, still doesn't happen, still doesn't happen here. 
I'm going to reload this, a couple of times and then I'll see if this will eventually happen.
It really should. 
I think here it happened.
 It's not very clear.
We can see it's clearly. 
All right, so very interesting.
Almost happened here, almost happened.
All right, you know what. I'm going to set this value even lower.
I'm going to go back to the browser, sorry to the text editor and
I'm going to set this to 2%, and I'm pretty sure it will see it quite often. Okay, reload. 
Yeah, so here we can see it's happened here at least once, here again it happened.
The others went on and these would probably go to fixation.
It's not clear the fate of this one here. It's not clear enough this one either, but those obviously will go to fixation.
And so I think it's a great example.
Here in the beginning the effects of drift, they are not stronger here than they
 would be up here.
You can still see you have the same kinds of fluctuations up here, but here they can really affect the ultimate dynamics of the population, because we could actually lose the allele in this stage.
Once we are on this trajectory it's very, very unlikely that drift will be able to overpower the force of natural selection, but in the beginning when your alleles are rare, the effects of drift
 can still be quite strong.
Okay and you can see this happen over and over again.
So this is drift and natural selection together. 
So the take away message here is that selection when natural selection occurs,  when alleles have different fitnesses and these differences can be very, very small on paper but they can have huge effects.
And so this is evolution by natural selection and now, what we'd like to do in the next couple of videos before we go back to coding, is to get a better quantitative handle on this process.
