Welcome back. Nature, In Code. 
We're in Chapter six, lecture 10. 
This is the last lecture of this chapter and in it
I'd like to show you how tiny modification to our code can have quite dramatic consequences on our host parasite dynamics.
So here we have our dynamics as we've observed them before.
And by the way these are called 
Red Queen dynamics from the book or adapted. 
The term was taken from the book 
"Through the Looking Glass" where the protagonist, Alice, finds herself in a strange place where the environment moves. 
And the Red queen who lives there explains to Alice that because the environment moves, one needs to do all the running one can do do to stay in the same place. And this is exactly what's happening here as well. In the long term nothing changes. Everything remains in the same place, so to speak, but one has to keep adapting all the time just to keep up.
So this is called 
Red Queen Dynamics.
So, by the way, let's go back to our real quick and go to our global variable definitions and just change these values here a little bit.
As I said, these are fairly high selection coefficients, so let's reduce them maybe by factor 10, so that we have a selection coefficient here of 2% and here,
5% and then save this, go back and reload this.
And as you can see here, we still observed the same dynamics, but they are actually much, much, much slower.
So you can reload this a couple of times and you can see these dynamics are much lower now.
Correspondingly, if we go back to the code and change these values to very large values. So for example, SH.5 and SP.9.
So huge selection coefficients and we save this and go back to the browser. We can see that these cycles are even faster.
So the selection coefficients here have only one effect and that's to essentially make these dynamics much, much faster or slower depending of course, on the magnitude of these selection coefficients.
Now, let's go back to the code and put those back to point two and point five as we had before. 
Okay, save this, go back just to see. Yeah, still looking good.
So now, I want to show you an example of how a tiny change here can have huge effects. We saw that the dynamics are consistent over time. They are always the same once you see one oscillation.
You can easily predict that it's going to be like this for the rest of time. Now, let's change this. 
Let's take a look here.
This is the host selection- the host selection line here the function and in this line here, we calculate the new frequencies by multiplying the old frequency with the fitness that we just calculated. And what we're going to do now is we're going to add a little bit of noise here, simple because you know, we may for example assume that our host population is not nearly infinite in size, and there would be some effects that have to do with random noise. So we're simply going to say, we take whatever we calculated here and then to it we're going to add a little bit of noise. And how are we going to do this? Well, we saw it before
We're simply going to add a little bit of math at random but weigh by some factor because otherwise this would be way too large, so for example, here we can weigh it by .01, so this will now be a random number between 0 and .01.
And now we're simply going to add this to each frequency, and then of course, at the end we will still properly do the normalization.
So a little bit of noise here, let's save this, go back to browser and reload this and you can see something quite interesting here so these seem to dampen.
Now, actually we don't see a whole lot here. Let's maybe increase the generations here by factor 10.
So I'm going to say 
4,000 generations and then we can reload this and now this looks quite interesting, so we can reload this a couple of times. And two things can be observed. First of all, however large the original oscillations are, they're quickly are being reduced. 
There are still oscillations maybe that's actually a little bit
 too large. Let's -- No, actually 
4,000 seems fine. So these would still reduce, but then it's not deterministic in any meaningful way.
Some of these have these large oscillations here and then they almost disappear, and then they become much larger.
And that's a really interesting phenomenon. You can see here all kinds of interesting patterns that occur simply due to this tiny little change of adding starcastic noise and that's something really important 
I would say. If the system behaves
in a certain way, and you add a little bit of noise to it, and it doesn't behave in the exact same way anymore, then you can probably assume certainly when it's a biological system that this is the more realistic where, because we always have random effects in the real world.
But in any case, this now concludes this lecture and this chapter so you implemented the last and final, and major force
I would say of evolution namely that of selection and natural selection. In particular here, we even extended this idea to a multispecies system that now competes with each other and creates these cyclical dynamics.
So congratulations to this achievement.
All right, so this concludes chapter six. You just learned about natural selection, the most important force in all of life.
You learned about directional selection, balancing selection disruptive selection, negative frequency of dependence selection which gives rise to these co-evolutionary cycles and so on.
And you did all of these by using fundamental programming concepts that you learned about earlier on.
Well, you did learn a few new concepts such as the while loop, and the ternary operator, but by and large, you were simply reusing things you've learned earlier, so just global variables, functions, data structures such as erase, iterations and many other concepts.
And this is really kind of the key learning goal of this course to reason computationally, to take a language like java script, open a text editor, wonder about the world and you say, "Hmm, I wonder what would happen if these assumptions were met." And then you simple create a quick simulation and see what the outcome is.
That was really always the goal of this course and hope now at the end of chapter six, you can see how powerful this can be which is learn about the four major force affecting evolution.
Now, as we continue our journey into chapter seven, we will keep a focusing on multispecies models and quickly on host parasite dynamics, but rather than asking ourselves about the genetic dynamics we will look at how infectious diseases can trigger large scale epidemics.
And this does not come as a surprise, so you we'll use of course java script to figure things out.
So I'll see you in the next lecture.
