Welcome back to Nature, In Code.
We're in chapter 6, Lecture 2
In the previous lecture we just learned about natural selection
And that natural selection is the consequence of alleles or phenotypes having differences in fitness.
We modified a code example that we developed in chapter three.
And we gave one of the alleles a tiny selective advantage.
And we saw the effect of that
Which was that this allele would very quickly go to fixation
Now in this lecture,
I'd like to not assume anything other than natural selection.
So we're going back to the world where we have no spacial consideration, no mutation, an infinite population size. so that we can understand natural selection as a force in isolation.
So let's go ahead and get our math hats on.
So like before the math we're going to develop is very straight forward.
Like before we're going to start with the genotypes.
And we're going to denote the three possible genotypes that we have.
A1A1,  A1A2, and A2A2 and we  can now ask ourselves okay, what is the fitness of these genotypes?
We're simply going to denote the fitness's here as W11 for the A1A1 genotype.
Denote W12 for the A1A2 genotype.
And as W22 for the A2A2 genotype.
And then we can ask ourselves okay, what is the frequency at generation T of these genotypes?
We're going to assume that these genotypes are at 
Hardy-Weinberg frequencies.
So for A1A1 this would be p^2
For A1A2 this  would be 2pq and for A2A2 this would be q^2.
This is of course nothing new for you.
Now the interesting question we ask ourselves what is the frequency of these genotypes going to be in the next generation?
So here what we have to do just like we did before in the codes
We take  this frequency and we multiply it with the fitness.
So here would be p^2 times W11
Here would be 2p^2 times W12.
And here would q^2 times W22.
Now the problem is that now these numbers may not add up to 1.
These three numbers we know they add up to one but these may now not so we have to normalize those numbers first.
So we're simply going to divide it by a normalizing factor which here 
I'm going to denote as W bar.
And by the way this W bar is called the average fitness but it is simply the sum of these three terms here.
Alright, so it is simply p^2 W11 plus 2pqW12 plus q^2W22
And this is of course
a very common thing that you have to do when you have a number of values that you need to sum up and, then
 normalize so that they add up to 1.
What you have to do is you simply have to divide each of these numbers by the sum of all of the numbers.
Okay, so that's pretty
 straight forward.
So let's make an example now.
So let's say,
Umm, I'm going to start here with genotype frequencies of 20%, 50% and
 then that has to be 30%
And I'm now going to assume that fitness is 1 here for the A1A1 genotype
1.2 for the A1A2 genotype, and 1.5 for the A2A2 genotype.
So what are the frequencies here?
Well, I simply have to multiply
these two numbers, and then divide it by these normalizing factors.
So I'm going to calculate this first here, this term here.
So p^2 times W11 so that's 1 times 0.2 so that's 0.2.
Plus 2pq which is 0.5 times 1.2 so that's 0.6
And we have q^2 times W22
So 0.3 times 1.5 and that is 0.45
So we add those up, that is 1.25 here.
So this normalizing factor is 1.25.
So again you can see these three terms without the normalizing factor would add up to more than one and
that can obviously not be that's why we need to normalize these numbers in the first place.
Okay, so 0.2 divided by 1.25 is 0.16.
Here we have 0.6 divided by 1.25, so that's 0.48.
And here we have 0.45 divided by 1.25, that's 0.36.
And these are not exactly the accurate numbers
I rounded them down to
2 significant digits here
But that's good, enough for the example.
But in any case you can now see that these three numbers now again add up to 1.
Okay but now let's observe what actually happened in terms of these genotypes frequencies.
So here we went from 0.2 to 0.16, so the genotype frequencies here went down.
Here we went from 0.5 to 0.48, so it also went down.
Although just a little bit.
And here we went from 0.3 to 0.36
 so this one went up.
So that's now really interesting.
So here this is in some sense what we expected
This was the genotype with the lowest fitness and so as a consequence we expected the genotype frequencies here to go up.
This was the genotype with the highest fitness so, so it kind of makes sense that we expect this genotype to go up.
Here it was actually not quite clear what would happen o some extent, this had the higher
fitness than this genotype, but it had the lower
 fitness than this genotype.
And we can now see in this particular example that this genotype went down in frequency a little bit.
So this is how you calculate the genotype frequencies in the next generation due to natural selection.
So no more genetic drift here
This is now the effect of these unequal frequencies.
And again the absolute values here don't matter.
We could put here 10, 12, and 15 you could do the math and it would have the exact same effect.
An interesting thought experiment would be to now change these frequency values so that they are actually equal.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So let's assume that that here we want all of these genotypes to have the same fitness.
And for simplicity, we're simply going to put this at 1.
Okay, so the assumption here is that they all have fitness 1.
Again the absolute value's don't matter even if they had a fitness of 2.
 It doesn't matter.
What matters is that they're equal.
These values here well we don't
 know yet if they'll go up or down.
These values here we would have to recalculate.
So we're going to do this.
And these therefore as a consequence its normalizing factor will be different.
And of course the frequencies in the next generation are going to be different. So we'll recalculate those as well.
Alright, so let's go ahead and do this.
Here we have p^2 times W11 so that's 0.2.
Here we have 0.5  times 1, so that's 0.5.
And here we have 0.3 times 1 so that's 0.3.
So those numbers add up to 1.
So that's good.
That essentially means that we don't have to normalize
 in the first place.
But of course we can still go ahead and fill these out.
So this is 0.2 divided by 1.
That's 0.2.
This is 0.5 divided by 1. 
That's obviously 0.5.
And 0.3 divided by 1 is also 0.3.
And so the kinda trivial outcome here now is that these values are in fact equal.
The genotype frequencies don't change and of course this is exactly what we observed back in chapter 2 when we looked at 
Hardy-Weinberg frequencies.
In essence this is now the mathematical proof if you will for the Hardy-Weinberg principle in the first place.
So once you have these genotypes at Hardy Weinberg equilibrium and there's no natural selection which there is in here because the fitnessi are equal then the genotype frequencies won't change and they don'there.
So the next thing we're going to do in the next lecture is look at the fate of the alleles
Here we just calculated the fate of the genotypes?
What is the frequency of genotypes in the next generation?
So with that knowledge at hand, let's go take a look at what happens at the alleles because that's ultimately our working definition of evolution.
The change of allele frequencies in a population over time.
I'll see you in the next lecture.
