Hi. Marco Albertini is one of the coordinators for the WatHab Engineering Department of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
In this video, he will present the case of "Build Back Better" Shelters after Typhoon Haiyan.
The response was launched just a few days after the typhoon hit the central region of the Philippines as a continuation of an earlier emergency response based on immediate food needs, healthcare and assistance.
And it followed just after a few weeks, as soon as people could start coming back to their life.
At that point, the most immediate need was shelter, and we decided to start our program.
In an area like Samar, in central Philippines, where typhoons and strong natural hazards are of natural frequent recurrence, it was necessary to offer a solution to the beneficiaries that would last more than the single event.
They were trapped in a cycle of poverty, and so poor means of reconstruction, and again, destruction brought by following events.
In order to try to break this, we wanted and it was necessary to "build back better".
And this included giving them the means to have something that was stronger than before the typhoon, in order to increase their resilience to the next event.
The scale of the typhoon was so big that many, tens of agencies and organizations came into the country suddenly, each of them bringing a different set of knowledge, expertise, skills, and also practical means to rebuild houses.
In order to standardize the response, the Department of Social Welfare and
Development of the Philippine government issued technical guidelines that all partners involved in shelter reconstruction should respect.
The three key messages were at the core of these guidelines:
Appropriateness-- it stood for giving an answer of the proper size according to the number of components of each family; something that would be adequate as well to the condition, to the climate; and also something that would look at accessibility of services.
It was necessary to yes, rebuild the house, but the house should have access in proximity to education opportunities, to livelihood opportunities, and to healthcare facilities as well as water supply and sanitation.
The main idea of building a storm resilient house was to have a core structure of the house that would be able to withstand any future events, up to strong events of
250 kilometers an hour, as well as small earthquakes.
Besides these core structures it was then possible to add additional elements-- like a veranda, like a kitchen-- additional external elements that could be potentially destroyed and easily rebuilt.
But the core structure remains intact.
And that's exactly where our program focuses, in offering immediately the construction of the core structure.
How to reach the target of such a resistance-- this was made through bringing technical elements, in particular focusing on the foundations, on the roof, on the bracing, on the tie down, and on other practical devices like a hurricane strap.
All of them bringing the house to be one element, and this unique element to be solidly anchored to the ground.
Besides the technical elements, two other factors improved the storm resilience of the house and they were the choice of the location, as the house would have to be in a safe zone, safe at a certain distance from riverbanks or from the seashore, and from potential landslide; as well as the choice of material-- this second element was also very important, as we needed to find good material but still affordable; so the right balance between quality of material, cost, and affordability by the beneficiaries.
The model of shelter was chosen learning from our recent experience from Typhoon Bopha that hit another region of the country just 18 months earlier than Haiyan.
The model was later proposed to the beneficiaries, prior to the construction, and all the main input coming from the communities were, as much as possible, included in the new design.
On top of this, our engineers brought up also new advice in terms of additional elements that would still reinforce further the wind resistance.
The other main challenge of this response was on the technical side in terms of finding the right model and designing the right model of house.
There were equivalent management challenges for a program that had set very ambitious targets of delivering 4500 houses in 18 months in an area that was totally devastated by the typhoon, where many infrastructures were disrupted, where even the means of communication were very limited.
To do this, it was necessary to set structure that would just work on this and they included more than 100 people, specifically hired for this program, on top of more than 1000 carpenters, trained and involved in the construction of the houses.
All these had to be perfectly synchronized on the logistic side, on the financial aspects, and on the reporting and communication side there were many departments involved for a common purpose over the 18 months.
These management challenges were as difficult as the technical side.
On the technical side, the validation of the chosen design happened at different levels-- if inputs from the communities were taken in the design, engineers validated them several times up to coming at level of headquarters of the ICRC so that all the design and the proposed ideas would match with the standards set by the Philippine government, but also with the standards set internally in the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement response.
Additionally, several laboratory tests were carried out by the Shelter Research Unit of the
International Federation of the Red Cross that was deployed specifically for the period of time on the field to monitor the quality of CGI, corrugated iron sheet and nails.
The choice of materials was an essential element in the process, as these would directly affect the feasibility of the construction, but also immediately impact on the cost of the operation and on the affordability for the beneficiaries of all necessary maintenance in the future.
For this principle, we tried to keep local materials in the design as much as possible. and all the main elements were made of local materials.
Amakan, the splitting bamboo, was used for the walls.
The coconut wood was chosen as the main element, as more than 33 million trees were destroyed by the typhoon and this was also an opportunity to reuse the fallen trees, to give also integrated opportunity of livelihood, and to free space as well from the fallen tree and allow planting again of new trees or the new farming season.
As well as CGI, the corrugated iron sheet, were the most important and most costly element, and it's the one that would determine the most, the strength of the house.
We tried to exactly strike a balance between quality of the chosen material and cost, as well as feasibility-- some materials locally, some materials were imported, but everything would have to respect the 18 months target-- deadline that we had fixed at the beginning.
We thought that keeping the model as flexible as possible was important so as to allow beneficiaries to develop the core house, around the core house, all the main infrastructures that they needed according to their own needs.
Some of them opted for a kitchen, some of them built additional verandas, others extended the space with additional rooms.
But in this way, once received the core house, each beneficiary could make it his own house and so personalize, answer to his own need, and also increase the feeling of ownership of the house.
Our objective, in making a house storm resistant, was to re-engineer a local traditional house.
And we did this through a few main elements.
First of all, the foundation, as it was necessary to anchor the house to the ground, and then to tie down all the elements, starting from the roof to the foundation together, as well as adding bracing, internal bracing, short and long bracing, as well as finding a proper slope, wind-resistant, for the roof that would also develop on four sides.
And this was different from the traditional construction, a simpler and cheaper construction that many would easily afford of two-sided roof, but we did this through training and through community involvement so that they would understand the difference between different sizes and different shapes of the roof.
With regards to technical materials, it was possible to re-propose a design that would already bring all elements known by the beneficiaries.
Only one additional element was proposed to the communities-- that was the hurricane strap.
But as simple as they were, they could also be replicated locally just using different materials.
And all communities were trained on that.
Hurricane straps are simple devices.
Metal straps that are used to tie down all the elements of the house to the roof so that it will never blow away because it is anchored to the rest of the house that is then anchored to the foundations in the ground.
In the shelter response, it was important to add a component of sanitation in line with the principle of "building back better".
Rates of access to sanitation facilities were very low before the typhoon and this was indeed the opportunity to help communities, to answer to their ambition of having their own sanitation facilities.
As soon as the program was launched and it reached its cruising speed, we then went back and built a toilet with a septic tank for each house.
The principles that guided the response are of general interest: sustainability of the operation; a focus on choice of materials; attention to the cost and the cost of future maintenance; the involvement of the communities as well as the training of the beneficiaries-- all these are elements that have a general value, in wide terms, and are applicable to any response.
Specifically looking at the design of the house, this matches with the environment of rural context in Southeast Asia, so it could be chosen and modified to respond to the specificity of other tropical, rural contexts in Southeast Asia.
It was possible to improve flood resilience of the shelters through two main choices: the first one in the design was to elevate the house on stilts, so they could resist flooding, also because they were anchored to the ground through the foundations; but also we need to think of the location of the house.
So as houses in areas that were considered not safe for reconstruction would not be rebuilt in the same places.
Remembering that most of the victims of the typhoon-- more than 6000 people-- were victims indeed of the flooding, brought by the tsunami-like effect after the typhoon.
The Samar region, that was the center of the shelter response, is recurrently hit by typhoons during the year, specifically, just 13 months after Typhoon Haiyan, a new typhoon of lower intensity but still important magnitude, hit the same area passing almost on the same path.
Typhoon Hagupit was the name and it gave us the opportunity to test the houses that we had just completed.
As a result, only four of them, out of 4461, were damaged-- it's below 0.1%-- and they were immediately reconstructed.
So as of today, all 4461 houses are standing strong.
The technology that we chose was a compromise between engineering inputs, advanced carpentry, as well as local knowledge.
And we tried to have the balance that would respect feasibility in terms of time and cost.
The technology could improve further, of course, but we need to see if the limits in terms of cost and affordability by the beneficiaries are respected.
This goes in contrast with the tendency of bringing other models, prefabricated models, in an emergency as a response from outside, sometimes often from different countries, and affording, then, a long-term sustainability of the project.
Our choice in the technology was to have some limits in the design but invest in long-term sustainability in that specific context.
The design of the house was based, as much as possible, on local knowledge, even if new elements came in in terms of re-engineering the carpentry of the construction.
Beneficiaries were consulted and each of them had to state their acceptance of the model, and eventually also have to bring in their inputs in the face of assessment, so prior to the construction of the house.
All beneficiaries were also trained on the construction of the house and specifically more than a thousand carpenters in the area were involved, trained, and then involved in the construction, so as to leave a legacy of knowledge, not only through the beneficiaries but also through the technicians who would then remain in the area so as to replicate the elements that were brought in to increase and improve the storm resilience of the houses.
The cost of each house is about 1500 Swiss francs; to this we need to add about 750 [francs] for the construction of the sanitation facilities, to a total that reaches about 2300 Swiss francs.
Even if this amount might seem very important for the beneficiaries in the field, it is much cheaper than many other proposed interventions that were brought from outside.
So the idea as well to use as much as possible local materials and local resources was indeed to keep also as much as possible the cost contained within a certain ceiling.
The ICRC and PRC, as implementer of the program, paid for the technology, but of course many donors and also many other members of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement contributed to the response.
On top of this we cannot forget the contribution of the beneficiaries themselves as they were asked to participate to the cost, with contribution mainly in terms of supply and handling of the wood component of the house.
Not all agencies involved in the response did this, but for us it was a specific choice.
It worked; it didn't leave anybody out of the program as in the cases where the most indigent would not be able to contribute, the communities themselves would help each other and bring the wood for the families who could not afford it and nobody was left, at the end, out of the program.
The reason of the choice of asking for a contribution from the beneficiaries would answer to two main reasons: first, it was an opportunity to mobilize people to use the wood-- as I mentioned, there were millions of trees fallen that would occupy all the farming land-- it was an opportunity to help people to move on and start clearing the land; and also, participating to the project, involve them, enormously, it made them feel their house, their own house, as they worked for it.
The positive aspects of the technology are mainly in the choice of a design that would completely suit the environment and immediately answer to the needs-- so being feasible in terms of construction in a rapid time, but as well, respect all the main elements for that specific climate and conditions.
That allowed the immediate acceptance from the beneficiaries and of course, respecting all the input of technical re-engineering of the design increased their capacity of resisting to the next typhoon and so improved their resilience.
I would mention that on the negative side, one limit was indeed, in the technology, in the choice of the main material, that was coconut wood, because in construction coconut wood is not an ideal material, but this was a specific choice due to the availability of millions of trees and the need of removing them and using them as much as possible immediately.
So no need of bringing wood from outside but using local resources, even if not ideal.
The choice of using local materials, as well as building a core house that would be as simple as possible, aimed to allow beneficiaries to afford any future intervention for maintenance.
Indeed, we know that every few years it will be necessary to replace the walls, made of Amakan, local materials, but this is perfectly normal and people are used to do that already for their traditional houses.
Other elements can also be replaced and maintained with periodic painting to extend their longevity, but any needed intervention is, and must be, affordable by the beneficiaries considering their average income level.
The shelter response must be considered within a much wider frame of response of the entire Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement in the region, that included other components such as water supply, access to health needs, access to food and opportunities for restarting livelihood activities.
The ICRC was also present in the region before the typhoon because of its specific mandate, carrying out activities of protection and assistance of the population, and will remain present within the region even after the project is completed.
And that allows us for a continuous monitoring in the coming years of the results of the project.
Among the many positive aspects brought by the response,
I think two are of particular importance: first of all, the intervention allowed 4400 and more families to have their house rebuilt just within 18 months since the typhoon and so allowed them to restart their normal life; second point is that the respect of the principle of "building back better" helped them to have houses that were stronger than before, and so they could break the cycle of poor reconstruction induced by poverty, and in this sense, improve their resilience to the next events.
