OK, we are in orbit now and this is inside the Space Shuttle.
This is Eileen Collins, on STS63.
This is the flight number 63 of the Space Shuttle in 1995, and Eileen Collins was the first woman pilot of the Space Shuttle, she flew twice as a pilot, and then she flew twice as a commander, and she was also the first woman commander of the Space Shuttle program.
And she seems to be sitting in the pilot seat
--in fact, she's not really sitting, she's just there, there's weightlessness, so nobody is really sitting anywhere.
For instance, this is the same view from the same point of the same seat, the pilot seat.
As you see, nobody is sitting there, but you have two crew members who are watching the Earth or something else, through the forward windows, and this picture was taken on my first flight STS46, in 1992.
It's quite interesting, because you see the feet up, and you can imagine that... if you look at the upper portion here-- it could be dangerous because you could change the switch position with your feet.
That's a reason why you can see this here, you can see this here, also, all of the switches are guarded.
There is a metal loop on both sides of the switch, so that if you have your feet there, it's very unlikely that you'll change the position of the switch, by inadvertent actuation.
Another thing I would like to show, are the Velcro patches here.
You see all the these pale blue patches are Velcro patches, and this, in a way, replaces the tables; if you have an object, you want to put somewhere, you want it to stay there, you put it on a Velcro patch.
Of course, you need to have a Velcro to Velcro interface.
But this is a way we can have things put somewhere, and they stay there.
This is a crew member in the up flight deck,
He just prepared scrambled eggs for the rest of the crew and there are the scrambled egg patches; of course, originally, they were dried, or dehydrated scrambled eggs, like a yellow powder in plastic pouches, but they were re-hydrated with the proper amount of water, and by they way, you see also the Velcro patches here.
So, after the preparation of the food, the food can be stored somewhere on the wall, so that it stays there.
You have Hasselblad cameras, that also have Velcro patches
--another Hasselblad camera here -- and by the way, here, you have the flight plan with the orbits.
You see one, two, three, four orbits, one orbit after the other, displaced, as you all know, about 22 and a half degrees; versus the previous one.
So this is a nice view of a crew member having prepared food for the rest of the crew in the up flight deck.
Now, we get toward the end of the mission, it's time to get ready for the re-entry, and we had to wear our launch-and-entry suits, the LES orange suits, that were providing protection in case of the crew having to escape the orbiter; that it was always that possibility going through an exploded hatch.
In case the orbiter, for one reason or another, could not reach the landing runaway, that it was a possibility for the crew to escape this way.
And you see a parachute here, so you have the commander, on the left-hand seat, you have the pilot, getting ready on the right-hand seat, and the mission specialist number two, on the left-hand side, also getting ready to don the launch-and-entry suit and prepare for the entry.
This is a view from the mission specialist number two on the flight engineer seats, between the commander on the left, and the pilot on the right, of a night re-entry.
And it's interesting to say that it's not re-entry because through the windows, you see it's very bright, and the reason is this is during the very hot phase of the re-entry between about 80 km altitude and 50 km.
We had about 10 minutes of generation of a lot of heat outside, because of the friction of the orbiter coming in the atmosphere
26 times the speed of sound with the higher layers of the atmosphere.
Everything was under control, the orbiter had a high angle of attack at that time, about 40 degrees angle of attack.
The idea was to brake in the higher layers of the atmosphere so as to enter the lower layers of the atmosphere at a lower speed, so we could control, on one hand, the heating and the trajectory of the spaceship.
This view of the re-entry of the space shuttle from the International Space Station.
This was on the occasion of one of the last flights of the Space Shuttle, when it was taking part in the assembly sequence of the International Space Station.
And after separation from ISS, and the orbiter burn, we see, from the Space Station, the Shuttle re-entry in the atmosphere, pretty much like a shooting star, or a fire ball.
This is a clear indication of the very hot part of the re-entry with temperatures, typically of the order of 1,000 degrees outside of the spaceship.
And then, there was a wake of hot gases plasma forming around the Shuttle, and in the back of the Shuttle.
Quite a nice view; you see the Earth illuminated by the Moon, you see the so-called airglow, this layer of the luminescence in the high atmosphere about 100 kilometers altitude, and see some stars in the sky; it's a beautiful view.
We've gone through the transition from the re-entry in the atmosphere, the hot part, to the gliding parts of the re-entry.
There were no motors, no engines on the Shuttle, for the last part of the re-entry.
We are now on the so called steep glide slope about 20 degrees angle, towards landing runaway at Kennedy Space Center, Florida.
This is the view that the commander and the pilot had through the so-called head-up display.
It was a 45-degree-located, semi-transparent glass in front of them, and through the head-up display the crew could see the landscape, on one hand, and the runway in particular, but also projected has some information about guidance, and about the speed
--this is the air speed-- about 300 knots on the outer glass slope.
You have here the altitude, in thousands of feet, here we are at about 5,000 feet.
And here, you have, the indication of the position of the velocity vector of the Space Shuttle.
The Space Shuttle is going in that direction, and this is a guidance symbol here.
The crew had to try to put the velocity vector inside the guidance symbol so the idea was to move the stick down, a little bit to the right, in order to put the velocity vector in the guidance symbol.
This was a help for the crew to manually perform, in a satisfactory manner the final approach to the runaway ended up with the landing touchdown on the 5 km-long runaway at the Kennedy Space Center.
And that's the landing right after main wheel touchdown which was about 190 to 200 knots.
There was a deployment of the brake chute which you see here, and then, there was a slow slap-down; the nose of the orbiter was coming down until nose wheel touch down, which just occurred.
You see the smoke here coming from the nose wheel touch down.
And the brake chute was there in order to reduce the rolling distance.
You see also something interesting: this is a speed brake here, and during the approach, the speed brake is normally at about half deployment, giving the crew the capability to either steepen the approach or make it a little bit flatter, the idea was always to give the crew a possibility to correct in one direction or the other.
The landing phase was of course supported heavily by mission control center in Houston.
You see on the front wall a display of the horizontal situation and the vertical situation here, with an indication of the energy level.
This is a position of the flight director and on the right of the flight director you have the cap-com or the communicator with the crew.
Post landing there was some immediate processing of the orbiter, on the runaway itself, and the latest stage it was pushed into this so-called OPF,
Orbiter Processing Facility, where it was lifted up, as we can see here.
The nose wheel is no longer touching the ground and there was a lot of scaffolding put around the orbiter, and there was a lot of maintenance done during several months normally, from one landing to the next, stacking in the vehicle assembly building.
And you see the complexity of all the hardware around the orbiter for the maintenance between flights.
In particular, there was quite a lot of work needed on the thermal protection system.
There were about 30,000 of these tiles; most of them at the bottom of the orbiter, and some of them had to be either repaired or exchanged as you can see here.
Well, this is the very last landing of the Space Shuttle, STS135, flight number 135 of the Space Shuttle, that was in July, 2011, it was the last flight of the visits and assembly of the International Space Station a night landing.
Quite an emotional moment because the program had started about 30 years earlier, in 1981,
135 flights,
The program had allowed the Hubble Program that we'll talk about later, had allowed also the assembly of the International Space Station.
Most of the elements, apart from the Russian elements had been brought to orbit by the Space Shuttle.
It had allowed also 355 astronauts to go in space during these 30 years, so quite a successful program.
Unfortunately, we had two major accidents in this program:
Challenger, in 1986, and Columbia in 2003, and we'll talk about these in the next videos.
