On this video, we'll briefly describe a few selected missions of the Space Shuttle.
Just to illustrate the extraordinary capability of the spacecraft, and also the wide spectrum of utilization of the Shuttle, which was used to deploy satellites, to bring back satellites, broken satellites, to Earth, to do space science using Spacelab mainly, to do interventions on satellites or telescope to do repair work, or to assemble large structures, which is the case for the International Space Station.
Now, this is a nice picture of Shuttle flight 11 or 41C.
At that time, that was following the tenth Shuttle mission, and NASA decided to use another code for the Shuttle missions.
41C. Here, the 4 is a fiscal year:
The 1 is for a launch from Kennedy Space Center.
The C is a sequence, so it is the third mission from Kennedy Space Center in the fiscal year 1984.
NASA used that code for a while, and then after the Challenger accident 51L again they started to use the normal sequence, the number sequence.
Anyway, that's a mission that had as an objective to do a rendezvous with a Solar Max Mission Satellite that had a defective attitude control system, and the idea was to go spacewalking, and repair that attitude control system, the spacecraft you see here, and astronauts in the so-called
Manned Maneuvering Unit, which was a small spacecraft that was attached to the spacesuits while spacewalking that allowed the astronauts to move around in translation rotation, and to get toward the satellites without being attached to the robot arm, or without having even a safety tether, and do the work on the satellite.
It was a successful repair of the SMM Satellite.
Again, quite a demonstration of the capability of the Space Shuttle; only from the Space Shuttle could you do such a mission.
Another example, this time it's STS-51A.
The first mission of the fiscal year 1985.
In November '84 in fact, but the fiscal year '85 had already started.
Now, this is quite an interesting mission, because on the one hand, the Shuttle deployed two satellites, two communication satellites, pretty much like the one that you see in the illustration.
After the deployment of these two satellites, it recovered two other communication satellites, put them in the payload bay, and brought them back to Earth.
And again, you see the involvement of the Manned Maneuvering Unit here.
So, the astronaut could get to the satellite, get kind of a docking to the rotating satellite, and use the attitude control system of the Manned Maneuvering Unit to break the rotation before the satellite was brought back to the payload bay, and eventually brought back to Earth.
And another one followed after that, quite a remarkable mission illustrating the incredible capability of the Space Shuttle.
I mentioned another important utilization is for science, and mainly with European developed and delivered Spacelab for the European Space Agency.
Now, this is STS-9.
The Commander was John Young, who had flown as a Commander of the first Shuttle flight STS-1, in April 1981.
Here, you see the Spacelab module with, for the first time, a European crew member on board, Ulf Merbold, who was a payload specialist of this flight.
The idea was to use Spacelab for science, whether it was by US scientists or by other nations, and as it was delivered by Europe, the first flight of Spacelab with a Spacelab module was going to be a joint European-US mission, so you have a payload specialist and a mission specialist inside the module performing experiments on this first flight of Spacelab at the end of 1983.
This is another configuration of Spacelab where we don't have the pressurized module, but we have pallets in the payload bay supporting instruments.
This is Spacelab 2 flown in July 1985.
The purpose of this mission was to do astronomical observation with an instrument that were on the pallets, but through the so-called
Instrument Pointing System that was providing a better accuracy of pointing at this scientific instrument than the Shuttle was able to provide.
By the way, that was an interesting mission, because we had the center engine failure ... not failure, but it shut down three and a half minutes after lift-off, and it was, in the whole Shuttle program out of the 135 flights, that was the only mission on which we had a failure, respectively, a shut down of an engine.
So the mission could not reach the nominal altitude, but it came a little bit lower than the planned altitude.
We still had two other engines providing thrust for the rest of the ascent to orbit.
So it was not a catastrophic event, but still an interesting circumstance.
By the way, it was not really an engine shut down itself, or an engine failure, but it was rather the consequence of temperature sensors in the high-pressure fuel turbopump.
There were two redundant sensors that sensed too high a temperature, and caused the planned shut down of the engine following this supposedly failure, but it was not one, it was a sensor failure not an engine failure itself.
Anyway, that's another configuration of Spacelab for astronomy.
Many more missions followed that one.
There's a grand total of 22 Spacelab missions that were flown from STS-9 in 1983 until 1998, at that time, on one hand, we had had Shuttle-Mir program, and the assembly of the International Space Station was starting in 1998, so there was no reason to operate Spacelab any more.
But still, it was not an insignificant component of the Shuttle utilization.
Here, we see Neurolab, it was a module-only mission of Spacelab in 1998.
Now in the area of spacecraft deployment on orbit, that I mentioned before, we had, of course, a very significant spacecraft that was deployed in April 1990: the Hubble Space Telescope that, in fact, filled the whole cargo bay.
You see the pre-launch configuration in the cargo bay on the left-hand side.
This is the forward portion of the payload bay, and this is the aft, and you see the telescope with a mass of about 13 metric tons was filling the whole payload bay.
On the left-hand side, you see the deployment on this mission STS-31 in the spring of 1990.
The telescope had been grappled on one of the grapple fixtures that you see here with the robot arm lifted out of the payload bay.
A nice view from a camera that was in the aft payload bay.
You see the telescope after deployment of the solar array.
The solar arrays are oriented to the Sun.
And you see the robot arm has just released the telescope.
Now, both the Shuttle and the telescope are freeflying in formation at this velocity of 28,000 kilometers an hour, which is quite impressive, but, you know, the deployment was done very softly, so both of the spacecraft were really flying in formation in parallel with each other.
We'll talk about the servicing mission of the Hubble Space Telescope on a later section of this course.
Now the Shuttle-Mir program between 1994 and 1998 was a result of a cooperation effort between Roscosmos and NASA.
The idea was really to do a preparation before the assembly, and then, a utilization of the International Space Station with all the other partners, but obviously the dominant partners being Russia and the United States.
Mir was on orbit at that time, and the Shuttle was operational, so it was decided to do dockings of the Shuttle with the Mir, and allow also American astronauts to work in Mir together with Russian cosmonauts, so it was quite an interesting learning experience prior to the International
Space Station exercise.
There was a total of nine dockings to the Mir Space Station with the Shuttle.
Obviously, also the mating system between the Shuttle and Mir had to be designed and engineered, so it was an exercise in cooperation between these two nations on one hand.
It was a technical cooperation also, and from a human side, it was also quite a valuable exercise.
Assembly of the International
Space Station, again the decision to go ahead with ISS had been made already in the early 90s together with the 15 nations total: the United States, Russia, Canada, Japan and members of the European Space Agency.
The beginning of the assembly was at the end of the 90s, and first of all, there was the Zarya module that was launched with a Proton launcher from Baikonur in Kazakhstan.
And then, the first arrival of the American elements was on Mission 88, and you see here on the left-hand side, the installation of Node 1, which was the first US element of the Unity Node.
On the forward portion of the payload bay here, it was mated there, and then, you see on the right-hand side a capture with a robot arm of the Zarya module.
Then, there was a mating of the Zarya with the upper docking port of the Node 1.
So that was the first step of joining a US element with Russian elements: the beginning of the assembly of ISS.
Here you have a summary of the utilizations of the Space Shuttle during 30 years from 1981, the first flight, until 2011, the last one.
We had a total of 135 missions.
Unfortunately, two missions that ended up in accidents.
We had Enterprise, the test vehicle for the approach and landing tests.
And then, we have five orbiters with the unfortunate loss of Columbia and of Challenger.
So, at the end of the program, we only had Atlantis,
Discovery and Endeavour.
Again, a total of 135 missions, and quite a remarkable accomplishment by the Space Shuttle, which was a very remarkable vehicle with incredible capabilities.
