Hello, everyone.
Today we'll talk about human access to space stations.
Space stations in general, because we have ISS, obviously, but we also have Tiangong 1 of China.
We'll mention that at the end.
Since the Shuttle was retired in the summer of 2011, the only way to get to the International Space Station for astronauts and cosmonauts is using the Russian Soyuz.
And you see here, in Baikonur, the Soyuz rocket lifting off from the launchpad, and on top you have the same name for the capsule, the Soyuz capsule.
By the way, you see the so-called "escape tower" on top of the Soyuz capsule, in case there is any problem during launch, for instance, a Soyuz rocket failure or an explosion, then there is a possibility for the crew to trigger an escape.
There are some rockets on this escape tower that can be fired and take the Soyuz capsule, together with the three crew members on board, to some distance and then they come down with parachutes on the ground.
So there is a very valuable escape system on Soyuz.
This is a Soyuz capsule with three crew members on board, coming in the vicinity of the International Space Station.
The nominal approach, and docking of the Soyuz capsule to ISS is all automatic, and you see here various sensors and antennas, and sensors and cameras that are used in order to guide and control the displacement of Soyuz in the vicinity of its target, ISS.
This is a very nice view of Soyuz docked to the International Space Station and flying over the Alps.
This is Soyuz spacecraft-- it says here Soyuz, by the way, in Cyrillic-- and this is northern Italy, this is Torino, this is the Mediterranean Sea, and these are the Alps and part of Switzerland, my home country, here.
Now, on the Russian segment there are several mating points for the Soyuz and for the Progress.
Progress we'll talk about that later, this is the cargo version of the Soyuz capsule, which very much looks like Soyuz itself, and here you have, exposed to the nadir in the docking port towards the Earth, you have a Soyuz capsule, and you have a Progress, and, again, you have the names here-- it says here Progress in Cyrillic, and Soyuz here.
These are cutaway views of the three segments of the Soyuz capsule.
If we start from the left here, you have the so-called <i>orbital module</i>, with the docking interface, here, and all the sensors that I mentioned before.
So the orbital module, by definition, is a module, or volume, that can be inhabited during the on-orbit phase of the flight of Soyuz, which now is relatively short, typically about six hours-- in the past it was a longer time.
The <i>descent module</i>, this is also the ascent module for the crew.
This is where the three crew members take place for the ascent and the entry.
This is the place from where they control the spacecraft also.
And in the back of Soyuz you have the so-called
<i>Instrumentation/Propulsion module,</i> or <i>service module</i>, with the solar arrays and the tanks and the propulsion system.
The view inside the descent module, which is also the ascent module for the crew, obviously, and you have here Tim Peake from ESA, a UK astronaut of the European Space Agency, sitting on the the left-hand seat, as a flight engineer for Soyuz, in the simulator in Moscow.
The center seat is occupied by the commander, and the right seat by another astronaut, or cosmonaut, a participant, but not taking place directly in the control of Soyuz for the ascent or the entry.
This is a view of the right-hand seat.
You see that there's not that much room in Soyuz; it's kind of cramped, but it's a very reliable vehicle and has served the community of Space Station partners and users very well over the past few years, and it will also in the future.
This is a view of a space flight participant,
Anousheh Ansari, inside the Soyuz TMA-9, on her expedition to the Space Station where she stayed about 10 days.
Now, the Soyuz capsule is used as an ascent vehicle to ISS, and now it's the only way to get there, and also as a descent vehicle, obviously, but also as a rescue vehicle.
We always have enough Soyuz's attached to the International Space Station that if there's a big problem we can have all the three, if there are three, or six crew members, or more, if needed, they can be taking a ride back to Earth in an emergency situation within a very short time.
Now, of course, for the re-entry of the descent segments of Soyuz you have a maneuver, typically a braking maneuver, that will initiate the descent, pretty much like we have in the Space Shuttle, the principal is the same.
Of course there is fiery re-entry in the atmosphere, the hot spot of the re-entry, there is a thermal shield, and eventually there is a large parachute opening, and for the last portion of the descent, just before touching down, in Kazakhstan, typically east of Baikonur, the launch site, you have a retrorocket firing at the last moment in order to reduce the shock of the contact of the descent module with the ground.
And this is a touch down.
It's pretty rough, but it's definitely survivable.
Now, we always know, more or less, where Soyuz will land, to within a few kilometers only; it's quite a precise process, and there are already support teams that are ready, with vehicles and helicopters, and medical support, if needed.
And here you see the Soyuz, just arrived, at night, and we have all the teams getting there to where the three crew members landed with Soyuz, in Kazakhstan.
And you see in the background all the recovery team.
We always have Russians, obviously, including doctors and some officials, and we have people from NASA.
Here, in this particular case, we have Chris Hadfield from Canada, on the left-hand side, here, so we have some Canadians also present in the team, here.
So there are always representative of the nation corresponding to the nationality of the astronauts present in the Soyuz for this entry, and return to Earth, in Kazakhstan.
Well, the US is preparing now to provide, also, a way to access the International Space Station for crew members from US soil, and we have commercial companies-- right now we have three commercial companies that have been chosen by NASA to develop a system to take people up to the Space Station and back to Earth, and one of these companies is Space X, and they've developed the Manned Dragon, which is a human version of the Dragon capsule that they've been using successfully so far to deliver freight to the International Space Station and also return trash to Earth.
And on the upper left you see the Manned Dragon with a service module.
There was an interesting test that was done not long ago where we have an evaluation of the pad abort system, pretty much like the escape tower that I mentioned on top of the Soyuz capsule, but here you have integrated thrusters on the side of the capsule that in case there is a problem with a Falcon-9 rocket that takes Dragon, or the Manned Dragon to the International Space Station or to orbit.
In case there's a problem, you have a way to escape with a Manned Dragon, firing these thrusters, and the test was successfully done in Florida recently.
Another company developing a way to take a cruise from US soil to the International Space Station and back is Boeing.
That's one of the three that was selected by NASA.
And here you have the CST-100 capsule, developed by Boeing, that will be able to take about six to seven crew members to Station.
By the way, this is the same for the crew Dragon, also six, up to seven crew members to Station.
Apart from these two capsule-type vehicles to take people to Station and back, you have one company, also selected more recently by NASA, it's Sierra Nevada Corporation, developing the Dream Chaser, which is a mini Shuttle that will be able also, from 2017 on, maybe 2018, to take crews to ISS.
You have a view of the Dream Chaser on the left-hand side where it went through landing tests pretty much like the ALT,
Approach and Landing Test, for the Space Shuttle, not completed yet, and on the right-hand side you have a view of the future where you have the Dream Chaser docked to the International Space Station through a kind of a service module, with solar arrays which you see here.
This is the last version that we know of of the Dream Chaser.
By the way, just as a reminder, you have the pressurized mating adaptor here in the front part of the US segment of the International Space Station, the European module here, Columbus, and the Japanese module, Kibo, with this external platform, here.
Last but not least, we have from the Chinese, of course, the Tiangong 1 Space Station, their own space station independently of the partnership of ISS, and they have their own ascent vehicle and descent vehicle, this is a Shenzhou, this is Shenzou 10, the last version, with three modules.
This is the on-orbit module; this is the descent module, where the crew takes place for the ascent and the entry, and this so-called service module with the solar arrays on both sides.
And on the right-hand side you have the return to Earth of the last crew of the Shenzhou 10, including the second Chinese woman, on the right-hand side, just in front of the module after the re-entry and touch down in China.
And this was the last flight of the Chinese into their Space Station.
They are developing right now the successor to Tiangong 1, which will be designated Tiangong 2, and they developed also a new vehicle for ascent and re-entry which will be designated Shenzhou 11.
