Let's talk about the International Space Station, the agreements about the collaboration of several nations, on the program of the International Space Station was signed at the beginning of 1998 between the United States,
Russia, Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency, representing the 11 member states of ESA that contributed to the project, so 15 contributing nations total.
The idea was really to make available to all these partners a world-class laboratory in space for life science, materials science,
Earth observations, solar physics, and also technology development, and mainly the development of techniques and support of long-duration space flight in the Solar System in the future.
You see the flags of all the nations involved, and on the upper-right side, you see the planned architecture of the International Space Station, a very successful program.
In this special video we talked already about mating of the first two elements of the Station, which were the Zarya Russian module together with the Unity node, the Node 1, which was the first American element, and sometime later, another module, a Russian module, the service module Zvezda was added.
About two years after the beginning of the assembly of the Station, we had the arrival of the first crew, and you see here the Soyuz, which allowed three crew members to come as the first crew of ISS, which has been permanently inhabited from that time on until now.
These are the first brave crew members of ISS:
Sergei Krikalev, from Russia, is here;
Bill Shepherd, and Yuri Gidzenko.
So they were the first occupants of ISS, and they stayed for several months on board.
The Space Station assembly continued, mainly with the arrival of the Space Shuttle, which was bringing crew members and new elements for the Station.
This is the arrival of the Unity airlock, US airlock.
It was allowing, from that time on, to perform space walks in support of the Space Station assembly from the Unity airlock, and not from the Shuttle airlock.
Well, little by little, the Station was being assembled.
Here we see the arrival of the first US solar panels, on top.
These are the large solar panels that eventually were going to be four in number, and at the end of the large side truss that will be installed later.
But at that time, we needed already extra power, and the power generated by the solar panels on the two Russian modules was not enough, so there were added solar panels from the US side.
One big challenge, from the construction and assembly point of view, was the assembly of the large truss, the side truss, along the <i>+Y / -Y</i> body direction of the Station, at the end of which were going to be installed the large solar panels.
And here we see the installation of one truss segment, the end truss segment on the port side, and solar arrays.
And in the background, by the way, you see the Greek islands, and we are flying over Turkey at this time.
You can see, on one hand, the solar arrays, not yet deployed.
You see the Space Station robotic arm, the SSRMS,
Space Station Remote Manipulator System, operated from inside the Station, and the assembly of these new elements was done mainly with robotics, the robotic system.
First of all, sometimes the robotic system of the Shuttle was handing over to the robot arm of the Station the new element, and then this element was brought to place, but there was also always space walking in order to mate the new element.
You see here one space walker, with his feet, and there is another one here, less visible.
Again, the Space Station assembly was really a work of robotics and space walking.
A nice view of the Endeavour
Space Shuttle, on STS-118.
The Shuttle is docked to the International Space Station through the so-called PMA,
Pressurized Mating Adaptor, which you see here, and again, you see the Shuttle robot arm here, and the Space Station robot arm here, both delivered by Canada.
This is a really nice view of the Shuttle docked to ISS, a view that is seen from the ISS itself, and you see the open payload bay of the Shuttle, here.
You have the so-called MPLM, or Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, provided by Italy, part of the European contribution to the program.
It was there in order to deliver goods to the International Space Station.
It was then deployed using the two robotic arms, and then mated to the Station so the crew could get the content.
Payload bay door open, and again, the Shuttle robot arm, and the Station robot arm, here, both involved in all of the assembly sequences.
Well, we are moving fast through the years.
I don't want to show all the steps of the assembly, but we are getting very close to the end of the assembly.
This is Shuttle Mission 134, the mission before the last
Shuttle mission for station assembly, and this is a view from below.
We are on the Earth and looking at the Station from below.
This is the front part of the Station, the velocity vector is there, and you see the Shuttle docked to ISS in the front part, and the USOS, the US segment, with the Japanese module, Kibo, and European module Columbus.
This is the US lab, this is the Russian segment, and the truss I talked about is here, along the <i>Y</i> body direction, with the solar arrays at the end, and these are radiators.
They are used in order to radiate in space the heat generated by all of the equipment inside the Station with an ammonia flow inside these radiators.
This is, again, a nice view of the front part of the International Space Station, on STS-134.
This is the US lab, here, this is the Columbus module, and what is interesting here is you see the external equipment of the Columbus module with, in particular, an experiment that is monitoring constantly the Sun, taking solar spectrum, and measuring the solar constant.
On the port side you have the Japanese module.
We don't see here, but there is an external platform attached to the Japanese module, and, again, both robotic arms on the upper-left side of the picture.
Okay, we are still on STS-134.
This is a nice view of the deployment, from the payload bay of the Shuttle, of a very important experiment.
This is the so-called
<i>Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer</i>, or AMS, which was partly developed at CERN, in Geneva, Switzerland.
And the idea of this experiment, or rather this collector of particles from cosmic rays, is to measure the composition of cosmic rays, and try to detect antiparticles also, and try to resolve some of the questions that we have about the presence of dark matter in the universe.
The Space Shuttle is illuminated by floodlights, and you see the Space Station robotic arm, the SSRMS, and this is the AMS, at the end of the RMS, before its installation on the starboard truss of the ISS.
STS-135, end of the assembly, in July, 2011, and this was also the very last flight of the Space Shuttle.
The idea of NASA was really to use the Space Shuttle to complete the assembly of ISS, and then retire it.
So the Station is fully assembled, together with a lot of spare parts that were put on platforms outside, in order to be sure that there was equipment to be replaced, possibly in the future, because the Shuttle was no longer there to bring new equipment to Station.
This is a nice view of ISS ground track.
You see ISS is here, over the Atlantic Ocean, and this is the current orbit, it's going to fly over the north of Europe pretty soon, at night.
This is the day/night boundary.
And it's interesting, because you see that with this inclination of the orbit of 51.6 degrees, you fly over most of the inhabited areas in the Northern Hemisphere, and you fly over, I would say, all of the inhabited areas of the Southern Hemisphere, which include the south tip of South America, and Australia.
I mentioned before a life science experiment done on board the Space Station.
This is a big area of research-- the body exposed to weightlessness, of course, and the gross changes, and these changes are carefully measured.
Here you have
Russian cosmonaut Padalka performing an ultrasound exam on Mike Fincke, a US astronaut.
And there are festive moments on board the International Space Station.
This is the 4th of July, 2009,
Expedition 20, and we had all of the partners represented in this crew, from the US, from Russia, from Canada, Japan, and Europe.
From left to right, we have Bob Thirsk, from Canada.
We have, in the background, just hiding the speed limit of 17,000 mph,
Frank De Winne, from Belgium, representing the European Space Agency; then we have Gennady Padalka, from Russia.
We have Koichi Wakata, from Japan;
Michael Barratt, in the lower-right-hand side, and on top, floating on top of the table, we have Roman Romanenko, from Russia.
Astronauts and cosmonauts on these expeditions, that normally stay five to six months on board the Station, they have to exercise in order to keep their muscles in good shape, and also avoid or limit the loss of bone mass, and typically, they are scheduled about two hours of exercise per day.
When I say "day," it's 24 hours in the flight plan.
Of course they go around the Earth in an hour and a half.
And there are various exercise machines.
Here you see André Kuipers, a Dutch astronaut from the European Space Agency, exercising in the Station in 2012, when he had a six-month stay on board the Station.
He's basically on a treadmill, because this is a good way to exercise the lower part of the body muscles, and obviously gravity has to be replaced somehow, and you have elastic bands here, that replace the gravity, that allow you to do treadmilling and run on board the Station.
This is the crew on board the Space Station at the time of recording of this video, Expedition 46.
We are at the end of February, 2016.
And from left to right we have
Tim Kopra from the United States;
Sergey Volkov, from Russia;
Yuri Malenchenko, from Russia also;
Mikhail Korniyenko, from Russia;
Tim Peake, from the United Kingdom, representing the European Space Agency; and Scott Kelly, the Commander, on the right-hand side.
Now on the first of March, which, again, is only in a few days from now, we're going to have these three individuals will come back to Earth, so then there will be only three crew members on board the Station, but they will be joined by three others in a few weeks from now.
And out of these three that I just mentioned, we have Scott Kelly, here, and Mikhail Korniyenko, from Russia, who stayed one full year on board the Station.
That was a decision between NASA and the Russian Space Agency, Roscosmos, to evaluate the effect on the body and on the mind of staying a long time on the Station, this always in view of a long-duration flight in the Solar System in the future.
So they'll come back in a few days from now, after having spent more than 12 months on board the Station.
