Yes, I'm John Mather.
I'm the Senior Project Scientist for the James Webb Space Telescope, and I work here at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, just outside Washington, D.C.
James Webb Telescope is the planned successor for the great Hubble Space Telescope.
That's an infrared optimized telescope much larger than the Hubble.
It's being produced by the international partnership of NASA with the European and Canadian
Space Agencies, all contributing.
It's optimized for infrared astronomy.
It's extremely large.
It will unfold in our space because it's larger than a rocket.
Then of course, it's aimed to do scientific discoveries that have not been made yet, but will presumably be extremely exciting.
We started thinking about the James Webb Space Telescope back in October of 1995-- although that isn't really the very first moment-- but that's when we started working on the telescope.
We chose the teams to work on the telescope in 2002.
Launch is scheduled for October 2018.
We expect the operations for scientific observations to begin in April 2019, and we're carrying the fuel to make the observatory run as through April of 2029 at least.
There are four main scientific themes the observatory has designed to address.
The first one is: what were the first objects that formed after the Big Bang?
They could've been stars, or galaxies, or black holes.
So we'd like to find that out by observing.
We have many, many predictions from theoretical approaches to astronomy, but nature has this capability of surprising us every day.
So we need to go look.
How do the galaxies grow?
We know that the Milky Way Galaxy has been made by assembling many smaller pieces.
We know that galaxies collide with each other quite often in the early universe, and that the history is quite chaotic.
We now have beautiful numerical simulations made in super computers that show how galaxies might grow.
But the big question for astronomers is: are the simulations anywhere close to correct or are there some big surprises still lurking out there in nature?
Our third scene that we have is: how are the stars and planetary systems being born today?
Stars like the Sun and solar systems like ours; these are happening nearby in dusty gas clouds not far away.
They could be observed much better with Webb Space Telescope than with previous equipment.
Partly because the dust grains that make the formation of the stars possible also steer the view and prevent us from seeing inside these beautiful clouds.
Fourth theme is:
How do planetary systems evolve over time and how does it become possible for life to exist on some of them like here on Earth?
We know now that there are about as many planetary systems as there are stars.
Most stars have planets.
Some of them have many planets.
How are they evolving with time?
How is it possible, for instance, that Earth has just the right amount of continents and oceans, the chemical constituents that make it possible for us to live here?
All of these things are key topics for future observers with the telescope.
The James Webb Space Telescope is much larger than the Hubble Space Telescope.
It has seven times the collecting area as a six-and-a-half meter aperture as compared to the 2.4 meter aperture of the Hubble Telescope.
It is cooled down to a low temperature, approximately one-seventh of the absolute temperature in Kelvin.
The Hubble Space Telescope runs at room temperature about 300 Kelvin, and the James Webb Telescope has instruments around 40 degrees Kelvin.
It even has one instrument much colder, at around six Kelvin.
The observatory is optimized for observing at infrared wavelengths beginning with actually red that you could see with your eye, the 0.6 microns and running out to 28 microns wavelengths.
The Hubble Telescope by comparison covers approximately 0.1 to 1.7 microns in wavelengths; very different than primarily wavelengths that you could see with your eye.
Another big difference is that the Hubble Telescope is serviceable.
We've sent astronauts five times to visit it, to upgrade it, and improve it, and replace the old instruments, and the old batteries, and the old solar arrays, and other kinds of things that needed repair.
The Webb Telescope is planned to be much farther away.
It's going to be a million miles,
1.5 million kilometers away from Earth orbiting a place called the Sun-Earth Lagrange point 2.
That's much too far away for us to be able to reach the observatory with today's equipment.
But of course, in the very long term future, it will be possible for either robots or people to be able to visit it if necessary.
It is not planned for being repaired, but it's not impossible to go there.
Telescope was immediately seen to be extremely challenging when we said we would build it.
The most challenging part was thought to be the mirror technology.
Because the Webb Telescope, although it has seven times the collecting area of the Hubble, needs to be of much, much lighter weight, much lower mass so that it can be carried by an available rocket way out to the distant orbit.
The Hubble mass is about 11,000 kilograms.
The Webb Telescope mass is about 6,000 kilograms, just a little over half what the Hubble is.
The first challenge was to make mirrors that would be good enough just as precise as necessary, but of much, much lighter weight.
The technology that we ended up choosing was beryllium, mirrors made out of solid beryllium and polished, so that they would have the right shape when they're very cold.
We also had to make them extremely thin and lightweight, so each one is made from a single block of beryllium that's been carved by machine tools until we send about 95% of the material back to the factory.
The mirrors are coated with gold, a very, very thin layer of gold because that's the best infrared reflector.
Another new technology that we required is that the telescope is much larger than the rocket vehicle that carries it.
It means even the great collecting mirror must be made out of pieces that are unfolded and then focused after launch.
We have to develop the technology to deploy the telescope itself and also to refocus it after launch.
Of course, we had unexpected practice learning how to focus the telescope in space.
When the Hubble Space Telescope was launched out of focus, we had to learn what to do.
As it happens, the mathematics, the algorithms that were developed for repairing the Hubble are exactly the same ones that we're using to make sure the Webb telescope is in focus after launch.
Another new technology that we required is the deployable sunshield.
The Hubble Space Telescope is shaped like a tube, with the mirrors are protected inside.
The Webb Telescope is completely different in shape.
We have a much larger telescope that cannot possibly be surrounded by a tube.
Also, we want it open to outer space so that it can cool itself by radiating its only heat away to outer space.
That means the telescope is unprotected except from one side where we put something we call a sunshield, basically a very large umbrella made out of five layers of thin metalized plastic.
This sunshield has to be folded up for launch then unfolded after launch.
It's a very complex unfolding process that had never been required before.
By the way, the size of this giant sunshield or umbrella is approximately the size of a single tennis court.
Just imagine some of our famous tennis players running back and forth over half of our sunshield.
Another technology we required is improved infrared detectors.
These detectors use a slightly different technology from what we have in our cell phones and pocket cameras.
We need to be able to detect infrared light.
The short wavelength bend that we covered is from 0.6 to 5 microns wavelength.
And for those detectors, we have a mercury cadmium telluride alloy connected up to a remarkable set of amplifiers.
This is a relatively new type of technology.
What we had to do is perfect it, so that very, very, rarely, we'd we receive a false signal.
Infrared detectors quite often--
The purpose of an infrared detector is to convert incoming light into electrons that can be collected.
A measure of quality is that almost all of the photons that come in and produce electrons, and also, nothing else produces electrons, so there's nothing happening when the detectors are seeing nothing.
We have that kind of detector also, a second kind that works at the longer wavelength range from 5 to 28 microns, that's silicon doped with arsenic.
Those detectors are also miraculously more sensitive than anything we ever had before.
We had to make a cooler.
This silicon doped with arsenic detector must run at 6 Kelvin.
We had to perfect a cooler to keep it cold for the life of the mission.
Initially, we thought we would use a solid block of hydrogen protected very carefully.
But we concluded that it weighed too much, and it wouldn't have long enough lifetime.
That meant that we had to develop an active cooler similar in principle than what we have in every kitchen by using helium gas expanding at the lowest temperature, to produce the cooling that we need.
Another interesting technology is called an ASIC,
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit.
We thought we needed these to be able to amplify the signals from our detectors and prepare them for sending the long distance through long cables up to the warm electronics.
So we made a new kind of ASIC especially for that, a combination of amplifiers and computer technology that can run very well at a temperature of 40 degrees Kelvin.
All of these technologies were enumerated at the beginning of the mission.
In order to get them, we held competitions and asked industrial companies to propose how they would do them.
In the end, we were able to achieve them all by asking for industrial help rather than by, for instance, developing them inside NASA laboratories.
The Webb Telescope has to be designed for a long life.
The longer, the better.
As it happens, the place that we put the observatory is an unstable orbit.
We occasionally have to spend some fuel to keep the observatory from falling off the orbit.
That's the requirement to do that.
Also, some fuel is required to deal with the torque that the solar photons, the solar radiation produces pressing on the giant sunshield.
If the center of pressure of the light hitting the telescope is not near the center of mass, then a torque is produced.
Eventually, that has to be compensated by firing little jets.
That's the number one thing.
We have to carry enough fuel to last till the end of the mission.
When we are very nearly done with the observatory's operations and have only a few ounces of fuel left, we need to use a little bit of that fuel to make sure that the observatory is disposed off safely and send off to interplanetary orbit so that it does not come back to hit the Earth.
The cooling system and everything else on the observatory are powered electrically.
They use solar panels, of course, to get the electricity, and so they could effectively run forever.
There's no limitation on life due to the cooling system.
If we had followed their original idea to use a solid block of hydrogen, then it would have limited the life of the instrument that it cooled.
Observations will be chosen as we do for the Hubble Space Telescope and most of the observatories.
Astronomers who have an idea will send proposals to be reviewed by a committee.
We anticipate probably
1,000 proposals per year because that's about what we get with the Hubble Space Telescope.
Committee will meet and make a recommendation.
Eventually, a choice will be made.
By the way, we have committed because of our international partnership that a certain fraction of the proposals that are selected will be for European and Canadian astronomers, not just for the American proposers.
We will be soliciting proposals beginning about a year from now in February, 2017, for something we call
<i>Early Released Science.</i>
Then proposals will be due about a year before launch for the major observing programs.
Then they will have time to prepare-- to make our decision about what will we observed and then prepare the detailed commands for the observatory and make sure that that works properly the first time.
That's how we decide.
We will have some time reserved for the Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute.
It will be allocated by him or her as needed.
Some of that is available for observations that we call Targets of Opportunity.
If you say, "I just saw,"-- as we did with Hubble-- that a comet is about to fall into Jupiter.
Can we plan to observe that?" then of course, the Director of the Observatory will be able to say,
"Yes. That's what I think we should do."
If somebody says,
"I saw a gamma ray burst," or, "I think a gravitational wave was detected over there.
We should look over there," then the plan is to send the request to the Director.
Within a couple days, we should be able to observe that object.
We will operate it by sending our radio commands every day.
It has a command memory on-board.
It actually is a little bit different from the way that we operate the Hubble.
The Hubble is commanded so that everything runs according to a clock.
Each observation is scheduled exactly down to the second.
The Webb Telescope is going to be operated a little differently.
We will send a list of targets that we want the Observatory to observe.
Then it will go from target to target as fast as it can.
The idea is this will be more efficient than the way that we do it with Hubble.
Of course, there's another reason that the Observatory should be more efficient, which is that we are not operating near to the Earth.
The Hubble can't see every part of the sky all the time because it rapidly orbits around the Earth.
And the Earth is so large.
That's why we choose to do it the other way in the Webb Telescope.
We have planned for two contacts a day via the Deep Space Network to send the data back and forth, so that we can have opportunity to hear whether the Observatory is doing well, if it needs any help.
And so, those are the major differences from the Hubble Space Telescope.
I should say that, at the moment, we are preparing our telescope.
We have just completed attaching all of the 18 mirror segments of the primary mirror to the carbon-fiber structure that will carry them.
We have just completed testing our instrument package which includes four instruments, by the way.
We tested it now for the third time, and we're very happy with it.
At the end of this year, at the end of 2016, we will take the observatory to Texas, where there is even larger vacuum tank.
We will test the entire telescope cold in the giant vacuum tank there.
By the way, it's the same vacuum tank that was used by the Apollo astronauts to prepare themselves to get out of their capsule onto the surface of the Moon.
It's a very, very old vacuum tank, but it still works.
From Texas, after it's completed its testing there, we will ship it to California, where it will be combined with the spacecraft bus.
That is to say all of the electronics, and the rocket engines, and the power supplies, and also, the unfolding sunshield, the great umbrella that will protect it.
After it's all tested and proved out in California, then we will ship it to French Guiana where the European launched ideas for the Ariane rocket.
Europeans are buying the rocket from Arianespace.
We're very happy with that rocket, it is a commercial success, and has had already over 
60 consecutive good launches.
It's an excellent rocket for us to use.
It's just the right size for the telescope.
The Cosmic Background Explorer, or COBE Satellite, was designed to measure the cosmic microwave background radiation and the cosmic infrared background radiation from the most distant universe.
It was conceived in 1974, and finally launched by NASA in 1989, and immediately started taking data and gave us some wonderful surprises.
There were three instruments on-board.
One was an absolute spectrophotometer for the far-infrared radiation to measure whether the cosmic microwave background radiation has the predicted, very precise black-body spectrum.
A black-body spectrum is what we would get if the early universe was extremely hot and dense and all in equilibrium.
It's the simplest possible spectrum that you could have.
Our measurement compared the cosmic microwave radiation with a black-body that we carried with us.
Within weeks, we were able to announce that yes, indeed, the cosmos has the predicted spectrum, and the cosmic background radiation must truly be the heat remnant of the early expanding universe.
That was a tremendously important thing to demonstrate since there had been considerable doubt about that measurement.
We, of course, have had many bad measurements, wrong measurements that preceded that.
So when we showed our spectrum to the Astronomical Society, in January of 1990, we received a standing ovation for that measurement.
The second major discovery that we made was to discover that the cosmic background radiation has hot and cold spots. what we call in Greek, <i>anisotropy</i>, which means
"not the same in every direction".
These were completely unknown when we proposed our mission.
By the time the mission was launched, people had many predictions, and some of them were correct.
We now interpret the hot and cold spots that we saw as the seeds of the structure of the galaxies that we see today.
Now, you see that the galaxies are not randomly arranged across the sky or are clustered together in huge groups, and that there are huge empty volumes in between those groups.
This is the result of gravitation operating on the original structure, the primordial universe.
The Cosmic Background Explorer Satellite team discovered those spots.
We were extremely pleased when Stephen Hawking saw those maps, he said, "It was the most important scientific discovery of the century, if not of all time."
The third instrument that we carried was to measure the cosmic infrared background radiation.
It also gave us an interesting surprise.
It showed that the universe has produced much more light than we knew about, and as converted, about half of its light from ordinary starlight into far infrared.
Far infrared light is produced by dust grains surrounding the stars and is observable only with special equipment that can observe those very long wavelengths.
The full story of that cosmic infrared background light has not been worked out completely, but it's told us some things that we did not know before.
After the James Webb, I think, I see, we need to build a whole sequence of great new observatories because there is so many things that we do not understand.
NASA has already decided what to do next.
It's called the WFIRST, the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Telescope, which will cover most of the sky with observations; a telescope which is about the size of Hubble, but instrumented with infrared detectors and a huge camera, so it can cover much of the sky instead of just tiny bits.
We know that we're going to do that.
I'm sure that it will show us wonderful surprises, and will help us understand the cosmic dark matter and the cosmic dark energy in ways that we've never known before.
After that, I know my fellow astronomers want to fly X-ray telescopes because you can't X-rays from the ground, gamma ray telescopes, because you can't see them from the ground either.
There is a project in preparation to search for gravitational waves using space observatory; it's called LISA.
The current plan is for the Europe to lead that mission.
After all these things are done or maybe concurrently with them, telescopes even larger than the Webb should be planned, I think.
If we build a big enough one with the right kind of technology, we should be able to not only answer every kind of astronomers' questions that we have today but to look for planets around other stars that could show the signs of life.
If we could find a planet like Earth that has the same chemistry as our atmosphere, we would have a good sign that it could be alive.
What chemistry would that be?
We would be looking for oxygen because it's a very reactive molecule that would not be present here on Earth without the photosynthetic activity of cyanobacteria, and algae, and plants.
We would be looking for the carbon dioxide, and water, and methane that are also in common and important for life here on Earth.
I think it's not so far off that we would be able to know whether there are entire other planets way out there that are similar to Earth and are alive.
I think here, in our own Solar System, there's a huge opportunity to discover life elsewhere within the Solar System.
We have Mars probes that are being improved every year with better and better instrumentation.
We have the possibility of bringing home some rocks so that they can be better analyzed here on the ground.
We know that there are oceans covered with ice on several locations in the Solar System including at least two moons of Jupiter, a possibility of a moon around Saturn that has water under the ice.
There is even a liquid ocean of methane on the surface of Saturn, oceans, and rivers, and rain of methane on Saturn.
If life is possible in some completely different way, then maybe that's a good place to go looking.
All of these things are great mysteries that we could tackle with more equipment and I think we will do so over the next coming decades.
I think that I never really chose to be a scientist.
I think I just was always interested in science as far back as I can remember anything.
I remember that when I was about eight years old that I was already hearing about science.
Galileo and Darwin were heroes of mine.
I remember going to the museums and seeing dinosaur bones, and volcanoes, and stories about the sky, seeing a giant iron meteorite in the Museum of New York in New York City that had fallen on the Earth.
I was just extremely curious about all of these.
I had the opportunity to learn a great deal from books and from toys that my parents got for me.
I cannot remember not wanting to be a scientist.
I was fortunate to be able to pursue that opportunity through school.
Then eventually, almost randomly,
I ended up working for NASA.
In my graduate school career, by the way, I worked on an experiment that was going to measure the cosmic microwave background spectrum, but it failed, so I got a job working for NASA and thought I would study something else.
I would become a radio astronomer.
However, shortly after I got to NASA,
NASA asked for proposals for new satellite missions.
I said to my new boss,
"But my thesis project failed.
We should try it in outer space."
He said, "We will call up our friends.
We will write a proposal."
That became the Cosmic Background Explorer or COBE Satellite.
This is a demonstration that failure is not permanent, and that sometimes, a problem is just too difficult for today, but we'll try it again tomorrow.
After the Cosmic Background
Explorer Project was complete,
I was thinking about what to do next.
I was beginning to think about a telescope that could be launched and unfolded in space.
Then, when in 1995, I got a phone call from NASA Headquarters that said it was time to plan the successor for Hubble,
I said, "Of course,
I want to work on that."
I was immediately ready to go and start a completely new kind of science, a new kind of career for myself by working on this new technology, new Observatory, which is to be launched very soon.
