Hello and welcome everyone. 
Today's lesson will be about the Convention on the Conservation of
Migratory Species of Wild Animals, also known as the Bonn Convention or CMS.
We are going to do an overview of CMS, look at why migratory species are important, discuss the threats that weigh on migratory species, see why CMS is necessary, how CMS works, consider the organizational structure of CMS, and understand how CMS's strategic plan 2015-2023 was developed.
To find out more, you could visit CMS's website, shown here.
What is CMS?
The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory
Species of Wild Animals is a global treaty whose aim is to ensure the conservation of land, sea, and air migratory species within the entirety of their distribution area.
International collaboration between the distribution area's countries is essential in preserving migratory species that they share.
This is especially when, each year, they cross one or several national jurisdiction borders in a cyclic and predictable manner.
121 countries attended the convention on the conservation of migratory species.
Why are migratory species important?
Wild animals in their innumerable forms are an irreplaceable part of the earth's natural system, which must be conserved for the good of mankind.
Wild animals are constantly taking on a greater importance from mesological, ecological, genetic, scientific, esthetic, recreational, cultural, educational, social, and economic perspectives.
Migratory species form the basis of economic activities that generate billions of dollars, such as hunting and commercial fishing on a larger scale, hunting and fishing for pleasure, as well as tourism.
Many rural communities depend on the seasonal and predictable comings and goings of wild animals for their survival.
Migratory species also contribute to the functioning of local ecosystems through their moving from one site to another, and so participating in the pollination and dispersal of grains.
They also regulate non migratory species' populations by being predators and sources of essential food.
What threats are there to migratory species?
Due to their nomadic nature, migratory species are particularly vulnerable to factors of an entropic origin.
They depend on many habitats and on many different migration corridors.
Significant threats include bycatches when fishing, the destruction and changes to habitats, the introduction of exotic and invasive species, non sustainable fishing and hunting, industrial and agricultural pollutants, and migration obstacles, like dams, fences, and electric lines.
Furthermore, climate change negatively affects reproduction, increases the transmission of diseases, diminishes the ecosystem's resilience and modifies migration patterns, thus have a negative and cumulative impact on long distance migratory species.
Why is CMS necessary?
CMS is the only environmental multilateral agreement that deals with all migratory species.
It's a unique and necessary approach to take up the conservation challenge for species that do not live in one place.
It is also necessary to preserve their migratory routes.
How does CMS work?
CMS have a variety of instruments that are legally constraining on an international level and other agreements between states regarding the distribution area of species and of groups of migratory species.
These agreements can be adapted to the needs of specific regions.
19 memorandum of understanding and 7 agreements are actually set up.
Another legal instrument used is the classification of species on the lists of one or several annexes, updated every three years.
Annex one records the migratory species categorized as endangered in all of or in a significant part of the distribution area.
No takings are allowed unless they are for scientific use for reproduction, for traditional use, for survival or even in exceptional circumstances.
Annex two contains migratory species with an unfavourable conservation status or that would benefit in a significant way from international cooperation.
The organizational structure of CMS is as follows.
The Conference of the Parties is the convention's decision-making body.
It meets every three years.
The Standing Committee provides political and administrative guidelines between the meetings.
The Scientific Council meets between the Conference of the Parties sessions to provide opinions and scientific advice and to identify priorities for research and conservation.
The Secretariat is the body that develops and promotes these agreements, supplies the necessary services at the meetings, supports and supervises research and conservation projects, and cooperates with governments and partner organizations.
The Secretariat is administered by the United Nations Environment Programme.
How was CMS's Strategic Plan 2015-2023 developed?
The Strategic Plan for Migratory Species was developed based on the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets.
An approach like this enables the strategic plan to benefit from the exposure and political support that already exists for biodiversity in general, at national and global levels.
The CMS strategic plan was developed by using already existing support mechanisms, for example, through capacity building or by revising national strategies and biodiversity action plans: that is number 20 of the Aichi Targets.
The CMS's strategic plan was drawn up by developing objectives specific to migratory species, by using the Aichi Targets as a framework, but without constraining it to those targets in order to preserve the identity of and the added value of migratory species.
To conclude, as an environmental treaty of the United Nations Environment Programme, the CMS offers a global platform for conservation and the sustainable use of migratory animals and of their habitats.
CMS brings together states that migratory animals cross or states in a distribution area, and it establishes legal bases that conservation measures, coordinated internationally can base themselves on, by migratory species.
CMS acts as a convention framework.
These treaties can vary from being legally constraining, known as less formal instrument agreements, such as Memorandums of Understanding, and they can be adapted to the requirements of specific regions.
Moreover, CMS has the ability to develop models built based on conservation needs for the whole of the migratory routes.
Here we are at the end of the lesson.
The next episode will be the conclusion for this module in the form of a short animation and of course, there will be this week's assignment.
Meanwhile, have an excellent day.
