As there are several possibilities to perform lithography,
I will start by providing some definitions and by explaining some general concepts that are recurring for all the lithography variations.
Then I will dive into details how one fabricates the lithography masks using a direct write laser tool.
This will be followed by a closer look into <i>UV</i> lithography and electron beam lithography which are to date the 2 main categories of lithography.
I will then conclude by presenting new emerging and alternative lithographies which are not yet part of the main stream applications, but that offer interesting opportunities for niche applications.
Lithography is the fundamental process of transferring geometric shape from a design to a thin layer of radiation sensitive material called resist.
Which is covering the surface of a wafer substrate.
These shapes or patterns define the various regions in an integrated circuit, such as the implantation regions, the contact windows, the metallic wiring etc.
The resist patterns made by lithography are not permanent but only temporary replicas of circuit or MEMs features.
To produce the final features in the material of interest, these resist patterns must be transferred once more into the underlying layers.
For instance by an etching process which selectively removes unmasked portions of a layer.
The pattern transfer techniques are described in all details in the lesson on wet and dry etching.
The lithography exposure step itself can be done by various sources of electromagnetic radiation, either by using photons or electrons.
All lithography processes must be performed in an ultra thin environment to avoid that any dust particle in the air can settle on the wafers or lithography masks and can cause defects in the device.
Lithography is also carried out in yellow light.
Indeed, the photo resist is sensitive to light with shorter wavelength.
UV light is therefore filtered out from lithography areas in a clean room.
More on clean room specific features are given in the corresponding lesson.
This slide provides an overview of possible parts from a design file or a CAD file, on a computer to define  a micro or nano structure or circuit on a wafer.
Here is the start of the data on the CAD file, on a computer.
And at the end, we want to have the micro or nano structures on a substrate.
From the CAD file, we can steer by computer control, the write head of a beam writer that uses either focus laser or electrons.
This is the first conversion from a virtual computer design feature into a physical reality.
In the majority of the cases the beam writer is used to fabricate masks for lithography.
This is because the writing can take a lot of time.
Only in cases of R&D only few devices are needed.
One considers the direct writing of the final structure.
Depending on the radiation source, one speaks about
UV, Deep UV, Extreme UV,
X-ray, electron beam projection, or ion beam projection masks.
All with their own specifics.
In each case, the radiation impinges locally onto a resist coated substrate and modifies the resist which can then be developed.
The resist subsequently serves as mask for pattern transfer by etching to complete the micro or nano fabrication step.
So once again to summarize, the processes involved in lithography firstly include the generation of a radiation that needs to be tuned and precisely shaped to impinge on the sensitive resist where needed.
Second, it involves a chemical reaction between the resist radiation, and then the resist and the developer.
Last but not least, it requires a very precise mechanical tool for the positioning of the mask or the beam on the resist coated substrate.
In particular for the patterning of alignment and multi layer features.
Each lithography follows a well defined series of process steps, called process flow.
It may vary according to the lithography used and the materials involved.
But a typical generic example is shown here where we go step by step through it.
First the substrate, it can be a silicon wafer or glass plate, is cleaned and prepared.
And eventually coated with a thin film of material that needs to be patterned.
Second, the photo resist is being coated on the substrate to form a layer of it with very controlled thickness in the order of a micrometer, but this can vary a lot.
And most importantly, with a very uniformed thickness over the entire substrate surface.
Some pre-baking is done to remove excess solvent and to dry the resist.
Then comes the essential step, which is the resist exposure.
This step can be done either by photons or electrons.
In this example shown here,
I show the use of a UV light source and expose the resist to a photomask that contains transparent here, and opaque regions.
Only under the transparent portions of the mask, will we expose the resist.
The other method would be using electrons that can be scanned over the surface, and thereby writing the pattern, and will be shown in details later.
In both cases, the goal is to chemically modify the resist under the radiation so that it becomes either polymerized by creating new chemical bonds, or by breaking existing chemical bonds.
The choice to use either optical
UV lithography or electron beam is driven by the quest for resolution and throughput.
The step after the exposure is resist development, shown here, which is a chemical bath that dissolves the part of the resist that has not been polymerized or whose bonds have been weakened by the exposure.
Then the resist pattern is transferred into the layer of interest by etching or by lift-off.
These steps will be explained elsewhere in this course.
At the end, the resist is not used anymore and can be removed by a so-called stripping process in solvent and cleaning acids.
And the target device pattern is now completed.
Here explains a few details on the resist coating steps.
First, one needs to ensure that the surface is clean and free of any contamination particles such as dust to allow a uniformed film formation.
Besides that, it is very important to tune the surface properties of the substrate for a good resist adhesion.
This is typically done using
HMDS coating either in the liquid or gas phase.
This ensures that the photo resist also in very thin layers, adheres well and uniformly on the surface.
For the resist coating, the wafer is held on a vacuum spindle and a well defined amount of liquid resist is applied to the wafer center like shown here.
The wafer is then accelerated up to a constant rotational speed which is then maintained for around 30 seconds.
The thickness of the resulting resist film is given by this formula shown here which depends on the polymer concentration and viscosity as well as on the spin speed.
Spin speed is quite fast.
Generally between 1,000 and up to 10,000 RPM to give uniform films from as thin as sub 100 nanometer to several micrometer, depending on the lithography application.
The curve here shows the film thickness as a function of spin speed for a typical electron beam resist called ZEP.
Such curves are done for each resist product and are available on the product information speed.
Besides spin coating, there are also other resist coating techniques.
For instance, <i>spray coating</i> allows using non planar substrates.
Another technique is <i>Casting</i>, that uses a mechanical doctor blade to uniformly spread a very viscous resist.
Finally, a technique called
<i>Lamination</i> transfers an already formed dry resist film directly onto the substrate.
The 2 latter examples are of great interest for very think photo resist layers.
There are several ways to expose resist.
In every case, it is a sort of energetic radiation that alters the resist chemistry as explained before.
The first and mostly applied way is to use photons.
Indeed, the majority of exposure tool for integrated circuit components and MEMs, are optical systems using ultraviolet light.
Optical lithography uses masks to create the pattern, either in contact for 1 micrometer scale typically for MEMs, or by projecting systems for Deep UV, typically for CMOS.
Optical exposure is limited by diffraction.
However, state of the art Deep UV exposure tools are capable of high resolution down to 10 nanometer scale thanks to the Deep UV wavelengths, new resist chemistry, and resolution enhancement.
The advantage of optical lithography is that the entire wafer or part of it can be exposed at once which allows for high throughput.
Electron lithography is primarily used to produce the photo masks that are then used in UV and
Deep UV later.
But more and more direct writing using modern EBL systems is now possible with reasonable throughput.
Here the electron beam is focused on the resist and then raster or vector scanned to write the pattern.
The resolution limit of EBL is given by the back scattering of electrons that expose photo resist area near the writing zone.
More details on this will be provided in the dedicated lesson.
X-ray lithography uses a highly energetic beam to expose the resist.
It has in principle, extremely high resolution as diffraction is much smaller than for Deep UV and UV photons.
But this technique requires a very special and complicated mask that is opaque to the x-rays.
Therefore it is not used foe integrated circuit or MEMs fabrication but is used for specific niche applications.
One of them is the exposure of very think PMMA resist in the so called NIKA process.
A further possibility is to use Ions which are like electrons, charged particles but they are also much heavier and have therefore less back scattering in the resist and the substrate which increases the resolution.
Ion beam lithography systems are constantly developed further but it is not clear whether they will be used for mainstream lithography.
So they should be considered as niche technique.
Now let's talk about resist, which is besides the exposure tool, the other very important ingredient of a successful lithography at micro or nano scale.
The photo resist is a radiation sensitive compound.
Photo resist can be classified as positive and negative depending on how they respond to radiation.
For positive resist, the exposed regions become more soluble, and thus more easily removed in the development step.
The net result is that the patterns formed in the positive resist are the same as those on the mask.
For negative resist, the exposed regions become less soluble and the patterns formed in the negative resist are the reverse of the mask pattern.
The similar classification can be done for electron beam sensitive resist.
Thereby the exposure is not done via a masks, but by direct writing.
Depending on the writing area, it is beneficial to choose either positive or negative EBL resist.
Positive photo resist consist of 3 components.
A base resin, a photo sensitive compound, and then organic solvent.
Before the exposure, the photo sensitive compound is insoluble in the developer solution.
After exposure, the photo sensitive compound absorbs radiation in the exposed pattern areas, changes its chemical structure and become soluble in the developer solution.
Upon development, the exposed areas are removed.
Negative tone photo resist are polymers combined with a photo sensitive compound.
After exposure, the photo sensitive compound absorbs the optical or electron energy and converts it into chemical energy to initiate a chain reaction.
This reaction causes cross linking of the polymer molecules.
The cross link polymer has a higher molecular weight and becomes insoluble in the developer solution.
Upon development, the unexposed areas are removed.
One major drawback of negative tone resist is that in the development process, the entire resist mass swells by absorbing developed solvent which may limit the attainable resolution of negative resist.
The resolution of a lithography process depends on one hand, the exposure tool, and on the other hand, several key parameters of the photo resist.
One of them is the resist sensitivity and corresponding required dose.
Because the radiation is also absorbed in the resist medium, there's a minimum amount of radiation, those required to expose the resist from the top to the bottom so that it can be cleared in the development step.
The required dose is called
<i>Dose To Clear</i>.
Or <i>Dose to fully cross link</i> in the case of negative resist.
The dose can be calculated by knowing the lands intensity distribution in watt per centimeter square and exposure time in seconds.
So the dose is equal to the intensity times the time.
The lithography resolution is the function of several parameters.
Besides the exposure tool performance, it largely depends on the photo resist properties.
2 important features are the intrinsic sensitivity, and the resist contrast.
We will briefly discuss both.
The intrinsic sensitivity <i>phi</i> of a photo resist, is the incident energy necessary to produce the photo chemical reactions required for defining patterns.
For single component resist,
It is given by the quantum yield, which is the number of photon induced events over the number of photons absorbed.
The intrinsic sensitivity of 2 typical photo resist PMMA and DQN are shown here.
We can see that PMMA is ten fold less sensitive than DQN for instance.
The intrinsic sensitivity can be determined experimentally by a systematic series of exposure tests with subsequent structural, and microscopic analysis of the resist.
Details on how this is done can be found in the text books or resist data sheet.
The resist that one plans to use must be insensitive to the ambient radiation, that means the yellow light in a clean room and must be sufficiently sensitive to the range of radiation energy provided by the exposure tool.
In order to absorb the maximum of energy in a minimum of time.
The resist should not be too sensitive either to avoid too short exposure times for a more comfortable process window.
The performance of any photo resist can be characterized by it's contrast curve.
It is an intrinsic resist parameter that defines the minimum dose limit that is required to start a reaction, and the upper dose limit at which the reaction is completed.
Photo resist contrast is important for both resolution and profiling.
The example here is for positive photo resist but the same holds for negative resist.
The contrast curve of a photo resist, plots the remaining resist thickness after developing in relation to the thickness before the development.
D prime over D zero.
As a function of the logarithmically plotted exposure dose.
The transfer of information from a given contrast curve to an individual lithographic process requires information of all process parameters which impact on the developing rate such as the resist thickness, soft Bake, rehydration, their temperature, and humidity, etc.
The contrast curve of an ideal positive resist, is a step function where the contrast is infinite.
Realistic contrast curves show a
D-prime of a D-zero already smaller than 1 for an exposure dos of 0, which is the dark erosion, and the non infinitesimal logarithmic detail in the D-prime over D-zero, bigger than zero over a non zero range of the dose to what D-c which is the dose to clear.
The slope of this decay defines the contrast.
High contrast is beneficial for the resist profile.
On the one hand, it is easy to achieve radical worlds while on the other hand it can be tricky to find the correct dose for high contrast resist as they are easily over exposed or saturated.
Low contrast may be good for example grey scale lithography.
So this shows the slope for a low contrast photo resist versus the one for high... contrast photo resist.
The optical transfer function(OTF) also called modulation transfer function(MTF), is the transfer function of an optical exposure system onto a resist.
The function specifies the translation and contrast reduction of a periodic sign wave pattern after passing through the lense system as a function of its periodicity and orientation.
Formally, the optical transfer function is defined as the fourier transform of the point spread function or impulse response of the optics.
That means that image of a point source.
While figures of merit such as contrast, sensitivity, and resolution give an intuitive indication of performance, the optical transfer function provides a comprehensive and well defined characterization of optical systems.
When using a lithography mask, with line with P and the pitch P the light being passing the mask, and reaching the wafer at a certain modulation due to diffraction.
This modulation can be described by the MT.effect expression which is
Maximum intensity minus the minimum intensity over the maximum intensity plus the minimum intensity that passes the mask.
This transfer function combined with the resist characteristic, the contrast, are now defining of the condition for the optical image.
For high contrast resist, it is easier to get a high resolution than for a low contrast resist with the same MTF.
On the other hand, the MTF depends heavily on the motif and the mask.
The more <i>b</i>  is reduced, the more the difference between the minimal and the maximal irradiation intensity reduces and it becomes difficult or impossible to selectively irradiate the different resist parts under the mask.
For low contrast resist, it becomes difficult to resolve the image of the mask and to clear the resist under exposure.
While keeping the full thickness of the opaque regions in the case of a positive resist.
The modulation transfer function can also be expressed in a curve shown here, that relates the spacial frequency line pairs per millimeter versus the modulation in percentage.
For increasing spacial frequency of closely spaced opaque patterns in a chrome mask, as expected, the modulation drops.
This all depends of course on the wavelength used, the optical transfer function as well as the resist contrast.
Once the lithography step is done in the resist, we can now see what pattern transfer steps can be done using the resist as a local mask.
Here an overview of possible process steps.
The first example, <i>a</i> is using the photo resist as a mask with Ions to do a local doping of the substrate with incoming ions that are masked by the photo resist.
Or...
Example b is to use it for an isotropic etching, the mask is protecting the substrate.
And when the etching reaches the substrate has isotropic, that means etching in all direction with the same speed which gives this circular shape.
Or example c would be to etch a thin film that has been previously coated on the substrate so the example of gold, or another metal layer can be etched locally through the opening and the photo resist.
Example d would be to use the photo resist structure on the surface as a mold, for creating a replica by pouring for example, another polymer over and cross linking, and creating the negative of the opening of the photo resist pattern.
Example e would be to use the mask for anisotropic etching, in this case, be in contrast with the isotropic etching we create vertical walls the well defined geometrical feature in the substrate.
Or example f would be to do electroplating, that means filling the opening and the photo resist by growing a layer locally in that aperture.
And the last example g, would be to use the photo resist as a mask for list off processes in a Physical Vapor Deposition step.
So this concludes this introduction lesson on the lithography.
I have shown you the process flow of a typical photo lithography process, and showed you some exposure methods that exist to irradiate the photo resist.
Gave you some first information about intrinsic resist properties, and also showed at the end, how the photo resist pattern can then be transferred into a layer of interest.
