After the lessons in UV and electron beam lithography, this lesson will show some alternative emerging lithography methods.
They offer new functionalities, enable micro nano structures that are otherwise not feasible, allow for rapid prototyping at the nanometer scale.
Some of them are also scalable for cost efficient nano manufacturing.
I will begin with scanning probe lithography for direct writing.
Then I will introduce nano imprint lithography.
Soft lithography, and Stencil lithography for replication.
Before looking into these new lithography techniques let's quickly remind that lithography and microscopy have many similarities.
In both cases the main goal is to achieve the best possible spacial resolution.
For either imaging or patterning.
A lithography tool is also very similar to the tool used for microscopy, with some added features to control the dose of resist exposure for example. in microscopy, we inspect the sample ideally without changing it and in lithography, the goal is to modify the sample so to speak, to write into it.
If we take the equivalent of optical microscopy and lithography we have an optical system with a lens and then our optical beam is focused through the lens system to the surface and the resolution is given here by the fraction limitation, λ/2.
In the case of scanning electrons system for microscopy or lithography, we are using a system with electro-static lenses or magnetic lenses that can focus and control the electron beam that comes onto the resist coated substrate, and then here we have a limitation by electrons scattering and focusing and charging effects.
The last example is the scanning probes, where we're using a sharp tip on a cantilever, and the resolution of this microscope or lithography as you will see is given by the near field effect between the tip and the substrate.
These two systems are called far-field microscopy or lithography, because the energy source is coming from far away and is focused on the substrate and the scanning probe is a near-field system, where we are approaching our probe very close to the surface to interact with it either for imaging microscopy, or for patterning in lithography.
Here you see an overview and classification of scanning probe lithography according to the tip and the action used for patterning.
These interactions can be electrical, thermal, or mechanical.
They can also be based on diffusive processes.
We can see that there are interactions that are rather physical or chemical, and which can be used to remove material from the surface or to add material onto the surface.
So it is evident that they is quite a variety of effects between the tip and the surface that can be used for patterning.
Illustration here shows the general setup of an AFM based probe lithography technique.
You can see the AFM cantilever, the sharp AFM tip, and the laser beam based deflection sensing, to monitor the probe position.
What is also shown here is that the material underneath the tip is altered.
This is done typically by means of and ultra small capillary liquid cone that exists between tip and substrate due to humidity effects.
Due to this capillary liquid, and eventually, and applied by his voltage one can induce specific and very locally electro-chemical reactions that modify the surface material directly for lithography purposes.
In such a way for instance, patent graphene-oxide patterns can be created directly in the graphene film.
The previous examples are still on an exploratory level.
They have potential as future nano-fabrications as they allow creating patterning directly in functioning materials.
But they are not easily adaptable for a general purpose lithography that we know so well using resist layers.
Patterning resist however would ease the implementation of these new lithography methods as one could benefit from existing know-how, such as pattern transfer by etching.
This is where thermal scanning probe lithography comes into play here, a resist is locally removed which is therefor very close to what we normally do in photo lithography.
Let me explain in details how this works.
A nanotip at the end of an AFM can deliver, it's heated to very high temperatures, up to 800°C or more by an integrated resistive micro heater and is brought close to a polymer.
A normal polymer reacts by softening  and can be displaced or piled up under the pressure of the tip as shown here.
In case one uses special polymers, that evaporate when brought above a threshold temperature, then the local heat of the AFM will not push the polymer away, but the resist will be completely removed, thereby creating and open pattern in the resist.
This resist pattern can be transferred by etch step into the underlying substrate material.
And the patterning step is completed.
The resolution that can be obtained is in the order of 10nm corresponding more or less to the apex radius of the tip.
This is the benefit of the near field interaction.
It is also a function of the nano probe thermal time constant which is in the order of 10ms.
A unique feature of thermal scanning lithography is that writing and reading of the pattern can be done hand in hand.
Indeed, the integrated heat does enable not only the writing but also the inset to reading and the metrology of the written patterns.
This allows immediate feedback control, field stitching without a use of the alignment markers and the use of pre-pattern structures.
Another important difference compared to other lithography techniques is the following.
Due to the ablative nature of the patterning process no development step is needed.
Neither are optical proximity corrections or issues with electron scattering or electron damage in electron beam lithography to worry about.
Here you see an animation how the thermal scanning probe lithography tool is working.
On the top, you see the side view, with the counter lever and thermal sensitive resist, and on the bottom, you see a top view of the scanning surface.
With the layout on the left, and the output AFM image on the right.
The tool writes line by line.
On the way from left to right, the hot tip is writing into the resist, and on the way from right to left, the tip is reading the written pattern.
This is repeated line by line, until the 2D pattern has been completed.
Scanning probe methods are single tip serial techniques.
So they are very useful for direct writing and for rapid prototyping, but they are very slow for production.
Hence, we will now look at, so called, replication method.
The first one I will show is the nano imprint lithography.
Nano imprint lithography, or
NIL, is already well advanced and industrialized and even appeared on the semiconductor road-map.
It was indeed first shown already in the 1990's, that it is possible to directly imprint nano structures, from a stamp into a polymer at the 10nm scale by combination of heat and pressure.
This outstanding achievement has triggered a lot of interest from the scientific and technical communities.
It is foremost, the simplicity of imprinting technique that has some striking arguments, despite some serious drawbacks.
As conventional photo lithography reaches the feature size limits due to light defraction and scattering effects nano imprint being a mechanical technique instead relies on a one-to-one master template that is replicated in an imprinting process.
Using a silicon-quartz or nickel or polymer master the nanostructures can be replicated in the imprint tool using the following procedure.
First, the template or stamp has to be fabricated.
This is typically done by electron beam lithography and etching.
Stamp and substrate are then put in intimate contact with each other, as well as with the Chuck, in order to get optimal thermal contact to the imprinting polymer.
The temperature and pressure is software controlled during the imprint process.
This process step replicates the inverse pattern of the stamp by viscus flow of the resist  due to the pressure from the protrusions.
Stamp and substrate are separated at the end of the process and the nano imprint always leaves behind a so called residual layer of resist underneath the stamp protrusions.
This layer must be removed by a so called residual layer etching, before further processing can be done on the substrate.
NIL has been shown to deliver excellent results for regular features such as periodic lines for gratings. or areas of dots for filters.
It is more difficult or impossible to replicate very regular geometries because of the resist rheology.
Here on this slide, we zoom into some details on the molding process and the imprinting process, where we see in particular how the polymer is displaced from the areas under pressure into the stamp cavities until they are completely filled, shown here from left to right.
Different stages of the imprint process until the cavity of the mold is completely filled by the flowing polymer.
The viscosity of the NIL resists depends on the temperature.
A typical temperature-viscosity curve is shown here, with the various transition temperatures of the polymer.
Typical NIL processes follow a well defined temperature and pressure profile, some realistic numbers are shown here on the right side.
Please note that some imprinting times can be several hours long.
Current R and D is focusing to speed up this step for high through put manufacturing.
Since the making of the first master mold by e-beam lithography is very expensive, one normally replicates it into working stamps.
Here on this slide you can see some typical examples of NIL.
On the top row, they are 100x magnified optical images taken by a microscope of sub-micrometer test features.
The scale bar is 10μm.
This shows the master the working stamp, and the substrate respectively.
The lower row shows the corresponding
AFM images of the master, stamp, and substrate respectively.
It shows the very accurate application from the initial high-resolution master here, over the stamp and the final imprinted product.
This is a demonstration of the supremacy of NIL for replication features at a sub micrometer scale for example for optical effects.
Here on this slide there are some other unique
NIL samples, such as defractive optical elements with eight height levels, as shown here.
At the bottom images we can see from left to right a gray-scale grating, with extremely high resolution, here some molds for microlenses, with the corresponding replicated lenses in polymer.
This image shows a photograph of a NIL stamp to be used for optical gratings.
This is one of the most powerful and beautiful examples when
NIL out preforms other lithography techniques in terms of resolution and through put.
One note please. These examples in fact use the NIL stamp to imprint the feature into the surface.
There's actually no pattern transfer into a layer underneath, so strictly speaking this should be called nano molding and not nano lithography.
In the next section of this lesson,
I will introduce soft lithography or micro contact printing.
As the name already suggests, there's a soft, or a gentle contact between a stamp and a substrate.
Soft lithography is a collection of techniques based on printing molding and embossing using the elasto-meric stamp mostly based on the PDMS polymer.
The key element of soft lithography is and elasto-meric stamp, here in blue with patterns as release structures on it's surface.
The stamp is fabricated by casting a liquid polymer precursor onto the master with the complementary structures.
The mechanical properties of this stamp are critical to it's ability to transfer patterns with high fidelity.
In principal, any elastomer can be used to cast the stamp, also most work has focused on the silicon based rubber, or cross-linked PDMS.
The stamp shown here again, is then inked with an inked with a liquid solution containing functional molecules.
This can be done by either using a path shown here left or by wetting the entire stamp with the liquid ink.
The stamp thereby functions line a sponge where the ink diffuses into the PDMS, and later out again.
The actual micro-contact printing step is then when the ink is transferred from the PDMS stamp to a surface.
Depending on the ink the print transfer can be done on a thin film of gold or silver supported on a silicon wafer, or on a glass slide.
Which is shown here.
Conform the contact at the molecular scale between the PDMS stamp and the substrate surface is the key to successful transfer ink molecules from the stamp to the substrate.
Micro contact printing is widely used in printing alkyl thiols on thin films of gold, silver, palladium, and platinum into a smaller extent and with more difficulties alkyl thiols saints on silicon and silicon-dioxide or glass.
The ink molecules form self-assembled mono-layers or SAMs, on the surfaces during the imprinting process.
Here the thyol based SAM serves as the etch mask to transfer the printed pattern into gold.
Which then is used as a mask for further etching.
The photos on the right show some examples of high resolutions of lithography, with on top, here, the mold, the stamp, and the final gold pattern from top to the bottom.
So this slide shows another example of high resolution soft lithography or micro contract printing, here is and SAM image of the PDMS stamp showing a regular area of pillars
60nm size, which has been used to transfer a file on a gold surface which then has been etched in the gold, we can see here that we lose some resolution due to the diffusion thyol molecules on the gold surface.
And then using a gold pattern to transfer to the silicon we get here the final structure into the silicon.
It's a nice example demonstrating how we can get from a relatively low cost, PDMS stamp, via printing techniques to the final silicon structures at the sub
1nm meter length scale.
Here in this slide you can see the schematic illustration of a PDMS stamp and two possible problems that may arise due to the softness of the elastomer.
One is the actual collapse of the relief structures or commonly known as the paring where the aspect ratio H over L is typically bigger than five.
The other problem is called sagging or recessed structures with aspect ratios where H over D is smaller than 0.05 during the printing.
To avoid these issues one can rely on a hybrid stamp that is made of two different types of polymers with different young's modulus to have an elastic layer on a more rigid stamp backbone.
This is not show in this slide.
This brings me to the last example of alternative lithography which is called Stencil lithography.
Vacuum the position through micro nano stencils also called lens lithography, is based on a very thin membrane with engineered apertures that is approached to a surface.
Like shown here.
When using physical way to position, such as thermal evaporation the flux of the incoming atoms will be partially blocked by the mask and only where the membrane stencil has apertures atoms can reach the surface.
This allows creating metal patterns without the use of photo resist and associated process steps such as development and baking.
It is therefore applicable to any surface and substrate material.
Stencil lithography is a convenient way to directly fabricate nano wires and their contact pads.
For this, a so called, dog bone geometry is often used as shown on the left side.
PVD of a conducting thin film material directly creates the nano wire without any additional process steps such as developing and baking.
Thus we're using the risk of contamination, which may effect the electronic transfer property in the nano structure.
It does allow studying new materials for this type of devices without a need for electron beam lithography for the final step.
Here on this photo we can see an SEM of a stencil with the nanowire slit and the two openings for the contact pad and the corresponding metallic nano wire, shown here with the bigger contact pads that can then be interfaced with some probe systems.
And here is a typical resistivity curve of a metallic nanowire as a function of a cross section.
Anti-length.
Stencils are fabricated by UV or e-beam lithography and aperture etching in very thin silicon-nitrite membrane.
Shown here, in red-ish.
This image shows a 100mm sized wafer stencil containing hundreds and thousands of micro nano apertures.
Such stencils can be reused many times.
Challenges are the stencils mechanical robustness aperture clogging, and membrane stress issues.
As well as alignment overlay.
Please have a look in the accompanying references for more details.
For creating small structures with sharp edges, the best deposition method is the physical vapor deposition technique which has a long mean free path.
Such as thermal, or e-beam evaporation which occurs, as we remember, in high vacuum.
This figure shows the geometry during the stencil lithography with the dimensions and locations of the source the stencil aperture, shown here, and the substrate.
Assuming line of side deposition, straight lines, one can predict very precisely the pattern as a function of the various parameters.
Another contribution to the pattern widening is not only geometry, but also the surface diffusion of the arriving thermal atoms.
From this observation it becomes obvious that highest resolution can be achieved by placing the stencil very close to the substrate, and by placing the emission source very far as possible away.
Stencil lithography is not meant to replace the conventional lithography, but it has some attractive assets for particular cases, as summarized here.
In all these cases, normal lithography is in fact not possible.
The left image shows how sub micrometer gold dots can be deposited directly on organic self assembled mono-layers on a SiO2 substrate.
Which is an important layer for organic electronic devices.
These are the gold dots directly on the SAM patterned through the opening of a stencil.
The middle example shows nano structures directly deposited on Freestanding MEMS standing counter levers which is otherwise difficult, if not impossible to pattern because resist coating on a freestanding mechanical device is hard to realize or impossible to make .
Here, one can see gold nano dots deposited on the cantilever and the AFM tip.
The right example shows stencil nano structures  that are directly and locally deposited onto a CMOS circuit without the need for resist chemistry and temperature steps.
This allows for post-processing highly sophisticated CMOS circuitry by locally adding metallic or other material nano structures.
This concludes this chapter on alternative and emerging lithography we have seen direct writing using scanning probes and the replication using soft stamps, nano imprint stamps and vacuum stencils.
Please note that all these methods are so called, top down patterning.
They are approaching the length scale of resolution in the order of
10nm to overlap with, so called, bottom up self-assembly where molecules and nano particles are using natural force for creating ordered structures.
