Welcome back! Nature, In Code.
Chapter 7, Lecture 1.
This is the first lecture and this chapter is all about infectious diseases and the epidemics they cause.
If you look back in human history you can see many infectious diseases spreading through the human populations.
Sometimes, causing great misery and large fractions of the population dying.
Most famously, perhaps the black plague that spread through Europe, and the rest of the world a few centuries ago.
But one need to only turn on the TV or any News to see that, infectious diseases are still a major threat.
Just recently was Ebola.
At the moment, Zika virus is getting all the headlines.
Next year, it will probably be something different.
At the same time, these are only, quote unquote the infectious diseases that cause the headlines or take the headlines. But there are in fact, hundreds or indeed thousands of infectious diseases currently spreading through the human population.
There are thousands, that are constantly being  imported from animal reservoirs.
So, it is a major threat.
But in this chapter, we are not necessarily concerned with the threat per say, but rather just trying to understand, how the diseases spread, what kind of epidemics do they cause? and what does it all depend on? and we are going to reason about this, of course, using Java Script.
For an epidemic to occur, we need a couple of things that are in place. First of all, we need a susceptible population and then, we need an infectious agent that can infect hosts, and critically, can pass itself on to other susceptible hosts.
Then this host gets infected and so on..
So, this is important for a couple of reasons if an infectious agent gets into one host but it cannot transmit itself to next host well, too bad for this host, ofcourse but there is now, no danger of large scale epidemics.
So, this transmission is a condition for an epidemic.
Of course, that is the infectious part of infectious diseases.
The second part of infectious diseases is, diseases.
In fact, many infectious agents do not cause illness in their hosts and this may be surprising to learn.
But, it is indeed is quite true and only a few cause illnesses and these are of course, the ones we worry about.
Because they now have the potential especially in combination with the infectious part to cause this large scale epidemics that can really cause, a lot of mortality and casualities and there are, of course many in the world that we know of in the human population.
Cold, flu, HIV, AIDS, Sars, measles,
Ebola, whooping cough, zika virus and you name it. The list is essentially endless and we can model this with a relatively straight forward framework, that is called the SIR
framework and this S stands for susceptible infected, and infectious and recovered, or removed. 
So what does that mean, so these are first letters here
SIR, it simply means that in the beginning, individuals are assumed to be in this class they are now susceptible to an infectious disease when exposed to an infectious agent, with a certain probability they do get infected, so they move into this class here and now they are infectious themselves and they can now infect other susceptible individuals and with a certain probability, they will move into this class so they clear the infection,and they are now immune and they cannot be infected anymore.
There are different variance of this model.
For example, you can ignore the recovered class when say, ok there is no permanent immune memory individuals who clear the infection will nevertheless, straight go back into the susceptible class.
You can add intermediary classes and so on..
This really depends on the complete biology of the infectious disease that you are trying to model and modelling is an enormously important aspect of this whole thing here, because these are of course, questions of great public health importance nevertheless, we can of course, for obvious reasons not do large-scale human experiments, thankfully so.
But we can model things in computers and this is indeed, what we do on a daily basis and many people do this, many research groups do this many public health agencies do this, they are trying to simulate large disease outbreaks in the computer and with computational tools, they try to understand what happens if you do this? if you do that? which is the best strategy? to deal with a particular pathogen.
So, what we are learning here is not only interesting, from a biological perspective but is also highly relevant for day to day public health considerations.
Now, the way we model this concretely is that we say, ok, there are individuals they are, as we said susceptible, and then when they get exposed to infected, and infectious individuals then they can get infected themselves and this happens with a certain probability per contact and per unit type and this probability, we call beta.
So, this is the transmission probability what can also happen is that, they can eventually move into this recovered class, where they clear the infection and this happens with probability gamma. and this is also per time step. So, this is per contact in unit time step unit time, and this is per unit time. and we are gonna go ahead and take this simple model. 
We are gonna implement this on a two-dimensional grid.
Why? A couple of reasons. No.1, we do live in a spatial world.
So, spatial considerations are important considerations.
When it comes to the spread of infectious diseases and secondly as we've seen in chapter five, it's actually relatively easy to do, to implement and added bonus, it looks really nice in a browser.
So let's go ahead and implement this SIR system in Java Script.
