In this video,
I will show you and describe some pictures that were taken during my own spacewalk together with Mike Foale,
EVA no. 2 of STS-103 on December 23, 1999.
Then I'll show some pictures of spacewalks that were needed for Space Station assembly and recent spacewalks for Space Station maintenance done by Russians.
I'll also show you some pictures of training, in-water training preparing for spacewalks.
At the end there will be some numbers for records and statistics of spacewalks from the Space Shuttle and the ISS.
And also previous records prior to the Space Shuttle and ISS programs.
Here you see training in the
Neutral Buoyancy Lab at the Johnson Space Center.
This is training for my mission,
STS-103 in December 1999.
We had a very high fidelity model of the telescope immersed in the water.
We had the robotic arm which you see here.
This is the payload bay of the Shuttle.
We also had the airlock of the Shuttle.
We could exercise different motions and also the tether protocol which you really have to rehearse and be sure that you do the right thing with the tethers.
There are two of us.
One of us is on a platform at the end of the robotic arm but still attached to the arm with a safety tether and the other one is getting inside the telescope after opening the doors giving access to the instrument part of the telescope.
Of course there are divers and there are bubbles everywhere, but the water environment is really an excellent training environment for spacewalks.
If you are properly neutralized in terms of having no part of your body going up and another going down, but you are really like in weightlessness.
Of course, you just have gravity on your body inside the suit.
So if you are head down in the NBL, you are going to feel a lot of blood going into your head which of course doesn't happen in space.
So that's the only pretty severe deviation from the situation in space.
You still have gravity on your body and as long as you have your feet down and your head up it's OK.
If you have your head down, it's OK for 10 minutes, maybe half an hour but you don't want to spend many hours like this.
This illustrates inside the Shuttle, where the volume is really small compared to the 
International Space Station, in preparation for spacewalk number two which I accomplished with Mike Foale in December 1999.
This is in the mid-deck, and mid-deck is relatively small, and we had seven crew members on board, some of them were sometimes on the flight deck, on the mid-deck, and we had the pants of our space suits that were floating in the mid-deck and the hard upper torso was of course in the airlock, fixed against the wall as we saw before.
It was pretty much the same for the Shuttle as for the International Space Station, the hard upper torso was always fixed to the wall.
Here you see a lot of equipment, for instance the floodlights, you see one here, the other one there, and there's one glove here, different equipment that we had to prepare in order to do a spacewalk.
We had a clear checklist of the tools we had to take for every single spacewalk because some tasks required special tools which we had to take out in the airlock and then take out spacewalking.
We could not allow ourselves to make any mistakes there, you had to take the right tools to do the task.
This is the first part of spacewalk number two.
I was one of the crew members there, in fact I'm here, in the forefront.
I was the so-called free floater at that time.
Mike Foale, my colleague, as you see is on the platform at the end of the robotic arm, brought to his place of work by the robotic arm operator inside the Shuttle.
I have my safety tether, you can see it's attached here to my waist and it's towed here towards a small cylinder that could go along a cable along the starboard sill of the payload bay of the Shuttle.
And we opened the avionic bay door number one to give us access to the main computer of Hubble that had to be exchanged.
Now, you see I am holding myself just at the rim of the door and I have my safety tether so I have two ways of being safe.
If I had detached my safety tether
-- just a thought experiment,
I wouldn't do that -- and if I had detached myself, then I would have drifted away on my own orbit.
Then the third way to rescue me would have been for the Shuttle to come and get me.
It's never happened on any Shuttle mission to have this third way being used to move the Shuttle to rescue an astronaut.
But there was always that possibility.
At the end of the spacewalk, after we installed the new fine guidance sensor number two,
I was on that platform at the end of the robotic arm, we had changed positions with Mike Foale.
And this is close to the end, I took some pictures with a Nikon camera covered with a white protective cover, a thermal cover for the camera.
You see there is a small tether for the camera.
And you see the tools here, this is a kind of open toolbox with a power tool, the pistol grip tool, and many other tools.
And all the tools that we had were attached with safety tethers because if you don't have safety tethers on astronauts, you lose astronauts and if you don't have them for other equipment, you lose that equipment, and if you don't have them on tools, you may very well lose tools.
At that time, that was in 1999, we didn't have cameras on our helmets.
Since that time, of course, cameras have been installed, small cameras on the helmet, even several cameras on each helmet, so we had a big TV camera here that we had to use in order to show the ground team in the mission control center, the work that we had done.
Well, that was a Hubble-related spacewalk.
Now we're going to look into an ISS assembly spacewalk.
This is one step of the assembly of the International Space Station where an element was brought to the end of the port truss of ISS.
You see here the solar arrays not yet deployed which are towards the end of the port truss, and the attachment of a new element of structure to ISS on the US OS segment, the US segment, not the Russian segment, was basically bringing the new equipment in the cargo bay of the Shuttle, open cargo bay doors-- of course, they were opened already at the beginning of the Shuttle mission, even before the rendezvous with the International Space Station.
Then the element was removed with the Shuttle robotic arm and handed over to the Station robotic arm, and then brought into place by the Station robotic arm-- which by the way you see here-- and then a spacewalking astronaut with tools was attaching and securing the new element to the existing part of the International Space Station.
Here you have two spacewalking astronauts, we see one here with his portable life support system and his shoes.
There is another one here, less visible, but there is another one there, both working towards the goal of attaching that new segment to ISS.
By the way, we are flying over Turkey here, and this is the Aegean Sea of Greece with some of the Greek islands visible on the right-hand side of the picture.
These are two nice pictures taken during ISS assembly.
The one on the right-hand side is quite nice because you see the background of the Earth about 350 kilometers below the astronaut.
Of course, you see the safety tether properly attached here.
Again, hold the structure, have your safety tether always attached, and if, for one reason or another, both of these are not satisfied, then, in this particular case, you have the SAFER system here with the little nozzles which we see here attached to the astronaut, and that's going to be the way he or she can be rescued.
On the right hand side, a nice view of two spacewalking astronauts.
This was before the completion of the assembly of the starboard truss, with a nice view in the background, again 350 kilometers below.
Space Station assembly was one thing, for spacewalkers, there was also
Space Station maintenance, to change tanks, for instance, or other components; and there was, on a few occasions,
Space Station repair that was necessary.
Here you see a definite tear on the large solar array and in November 2007, we had Scott Parazynski here on a small platform at the end of the Space Station robotic arm, which you see here, brought to the place of work in order to do the repair of the damaged solar array.
I've shown pictures of training for Hubble repair missions using the NBL with a high fidelity model of the telescope.
Of course, this is no longer current now, but the NBL is used constantly for training of astronauts in view of spacewalks related to the Space Station, not assembly any more but space station maintenance.
Here you have Peggy Whitson, an American NASA astronaut, who was commander of ISS over six months, a couple of years ago, and here you see her in training in the NBL in view of expedition 50/51 which should start at the end of 2016.
You also see again the safety tether.
All the tether protocol and tether attachment, although not needed in the pool, for safety reasons, are practiced rigorously in the NBL.
You also see the mini workstation loaded with equipment in front of Peggy.
This is a picture of a recent spacewalk done by two Russian cosmonauts,
Malenchenko and Sergey Volkov in February 2016.
They were wearing the Orlan space suit for this spacewalk, which is the case for all of the Russian spacewalks.
This is a pretty large portable life support system of the Orlan, which is a distinction of the geometry of the Orlan versus the EMU.
Some statistics related to spacewalking.
Anatoly Solovyev, a Russian, has the record for the most EVAs,
16 in total, and a total time of more than 82 hours.
On the US side, you have
Michael Lopez-Alegria,
10 spacewalks for 67 hours, and Christer Fuglesang of the European Space Agency had 5 spacewalks and more than 30 hours of total spacewalking time, and that's a record that will stay for a while, it's quite a long time.
These are the EVA statistics, quite interesting numbers,
I won't go into all of them, obviously.
You had the first short spacewalk of Alexei Leonov, which I mentioned already, in 1965.
Let's look at the numbers, of the total number of spacewalks.
For the Shuttle, 131; and for ISS, close to 200.
Of course, a number of these Space Shuttle spacewalks were related to ISS so these are counted two times.
The Shuttle spacewalks for Space Station assembly are counted under Space Shuttle as well as under ISS.
We see that spacewalking has been an extremely useful capability in human space flight.
Without spacewalking, no Hubble maintenance, no Space Station assembly.
It's really an essential tool.
