Hello. In this video, we will present the general principles on ethics and disaster risk reduction.
We will look at ethics during different DRR phases, and finally, the ethical use of science and technology in DRR.
Ethics entails that decisions are taken to foster the well-being of people, communities and the environment as well as to reduce risks.
The respect of human rights is at the center of ethics in the field of DRR.
Other general ethical principles in disaster risk reduction include that people and countries should be united in solidarity to share the costs of disasters but also the advantages of reduction measures.
All parties including authorities, private sector,
NGOs and individuals, and media also share the responsibility to prevent and respond to disasters.
Prevention, preparedness, response and recovery should be implemented without discrimination.
Principles of humanity-- that is to say, respect, tolerance and compassion-- should be applied in any disaster situation.
Likewise, impartiality, and avoidance of favoritism should be respected at any stages of DRR.
Neutrality is also important.
Political, racial, religious or ideological debates should not take place in DRR activities.
Resilience is also a matter of cooperation between nations.
They must protect the local communities, but also the foreigners that are present on their territory when a disaster occurs.
As we mentioned before, ethics should be applied at any stage of DRR.
Prior to disasters, people have, for example, the right to be informed, to express themselves freely, and most importantly, to participate in decision making.
Specific measures aimed at supporting the most vulnerable communities and people, should be implemented as well.
During disasters, participation in decision making remains a key ethical principle as it is at any stage of DRR.
Furthermore, anyone should be able to benefit from humanitarian assistance in the respect of dignity.
After disasters, an ethical approach means that reconstruction should be quick, but not to the detriment of the environment and safety.
During this phase, the protection of economic, social, cultural, but also civil and political rights, must be ensured.
Throughout this course, we have seen the importance of science and technology for DRR, however,
Technology has also created a number of new, or has widened existing inequalities, and I think that's something that we need to take very much into consideration when we start thinking and when we use technologies for disaster response and disaster management.
One example of reducing technology-related inequalities is digital inclusion.
Digital inclusion is a term that is now used more and more often to say that it's very important that people living in areas where they have no access to digital technologies, that they should be included.
That they get access to digital technologies, so that there is, for example, mobile coverage or that they can buy a mobile phone, but it goes beyond just having access to the technologies.
It goes also into the direction of that people understand how to use this technology.
That they know what type of mobile services are available to them and that they can afford it.
So if all those aspects are covered then we can say a community is really digitally included.
And then they can benefit from those digital technologies.
In addition to inequalities, science and technology can cause physical harm and have negative effects on rights, dignity and relationships.
The use of science and technology for DRR, needs to be evaluated in the light of ethics and the risk assessment should be conducted to ensure the do-no-harm principle.
One way to ensure this is to develop codes of conducts.
These are sets of rules that should be followed regarding the use of technology.
Andrew Shroeder explains this in the context of UAVs.
Countries throughout the world have been attempting to create rule structures for what counts as an appropriate and legal use of UAV technology and they are usually based on the flight rules of commercial aircrafts but UAVs obviously have special conditions.
They're smaller, they do not have a pilot aboard, they can be piloted by any number of people.
As they get more automated, they are getting out into the hands of people that have no previous experience with flight, and so that means that those rule systems are being constantly adapted and changed.
We, at UAViators helped develop a code of conduct in consultation with agencies throughout the UN system, 
NGOs and a number of other people that work in humanitarian response, to be able to identify the key regulatory challenges, the key ethical challenges, the key safety challenges, that are faced by people operating UAVs in emergency contexts.
UAVs are getting to be so easy to operate that people no longer think of them as dangerous tools.
They think of them as either, you know, like your laptop, like a computer that anybody can operate.
And this is a benefit because it expands, it democratizes, the reach, it also means that people forget that it's something that you can really hurt someone with if it's operated incorrectly.
If things go wrong, how do you respond to it.
So that becomes quite important to think through.
In addition to develop and follow codes of conduct in scientific and technological applications for DRR, other principles, summarized by UNESCO, should also be followed.
Integrity and responsibility in research and innovation means that honesty and accountability have to be respected as well as the fairness in working with others.
As science and technology have impacts on human well-being, the participation of all segments of society, as well as their consultation in the conduct of science and technology development, should be pursued.
Science and technology should not threaten local, indigenous, and traditional knowledge.
Moreover, fully open access science and technology should be favored for the benefit of all.
In this video, we have seen that many ethical principles should be used in the conduct of disaster risk reduction.
We have seen that science and technology for DRR should cause no harm, and the codes of conduct should be followed.
We have to base our actions and decisions on general ethical principles for science and technology in order to ensure this.
