Let's talk about astronaut training today.
You have been selected as an astronaut candidate, wherever it is, in the US, in Russia, in Europe, in Canada, in Japan, or in China, or wherever it is, and most of the time, in these countries, when you are selected, you are not really an astronaut, bur you are an astronaut candidate and you have to go through training, and before you go to such a training as in the centrifuge, in zero G airplanes, in simulators, you have a so-called basic training, where you learn about space engineering, about space science, about medicine, and you have to learn languages-- it's obviously a multi-language undertaking with English and Russian, and possibly Chinese-- and where you have to learn the other partners' languages, and basically, for the Space Station, it's English and Russian.
This is the basic training that takes about one year, or a year and a half, then you go into a so-called advanced training where you learn more about the spaceships themselves, whether it is the Soyuz and the International Space Station, or whatever vehicle they are going to be using for your space missions.
Here you see a centrifuge in Star City.
Of course, going to space, you are going to be exposed to pretty large G forces, acceleration going up, coming down also, whether it is with the Space Shuttle, or whether it is with the Soyuz or any other ascent or entry spaceship.
And then, during your mission, whether it's a few weeks or a few months-- possibly a few years in the future-- you are going to be exposed to zero G, so you have to have the possibility to train in these high G environments and also low G environment.
This is a centrifuge in Star City where cosmonauts and astronauts get exposed to the relatively high G forces you have for the ascent into space, with the Soyuz, or the re-entry in the atmosphere, and the touchdown in Kazakstan with the Soyuz.
A similar training was done for the Space Shuttle.
We had the opportunity to go through the profile, the G profile of the ascent into space, which was going to a maximum of 3G only, for the Space Shuttle.
We didn't do any training for the re-entry, because at Shuttle we only had 1G and a half maximum during the re-entry.
But anyway, high G environment training in a centrifuge is part of the astronaut training.
Zero G training: we don't do a lot of that; and this is fun: we do it in a so-called zero G airplane, where we fly parabolic trajectories, a few parabolas, maybe 10, 20, or more parabolas per flight and during the parabolas, we are exposed to zero G, basically zero G for about 20 seconds per parabola.
We don't do a lot of that, but each astronaut has the opportunity to do one or few flights in zero G airplanes, to be familiarized with the zero G environment.
Simulator training: this is of course, part of the advanced training, or the mission-specific training, and of course, before getting into the simulator-- whether it is Soyuz, which you see here, or Shuttle, or any other ascent or entry vehicle-- there is a lot of classroom training, there is the use of also part-task trainers, where you train the use of a specific system before you get the integrated training in the simulator itself.
And some of the simulators are fix-based simulators, others are motion-based simulators, where you can see all the dynamics of the ascent or the entry of the spaceship.
Well, this is the Soyuz egress training, this is part of training for the use of the Soyuz spacecraft, and you see Tim Peake on the left-hand side, with the so-called suit, egressing the Soyuz spacecraft, and on the right-hand side, you see-- there is always a possibility that Soyuz would get into the water and there is training also for this situation.
There is always a possibility that Soyuz will touch down on planet Earth, not at a planned location east of Baikonur, in Kazakhstan which is a normal case but possibly in a remote area, and the astronauts and the cosmonauts may have to survive for few hours, or maybe a few days, so this training takes place.
Is also a character training, I would say.
Because you are exposed to a pretty hard environment, you have to take care of yourself, and your health, and your survival, and generally speaking, it's training that is done since many, many years, and is still being done today in relationship with the use of the Russian spacecraft.
In the past, a lot of the Shuttle training was done in the simulator, and at the Johnson Space Center Houston, we had a fix-based simulator for the Shuttle, and a motion-based simulator, and here you see the training of the crew.
You had the Commander on the left, the pilot on the right-hand side, and the flight engineer or mission specialist number two, in the middle, with procedures, and this was an extensive part of the Shuttle training.
The Shuttle was very complex spacecraft, and it was really needed to do a lot of this training.
This is a very realistic environment, you see the use of procedures, you see the cue cards, you see big timers, timers on the front part of the instrument panel.
Of course, some of this training was done also wearing the launch-and-entry suit.
Here you see them wearing light clothing, but some of it was done in the launch-and-entry suit.
And some of it was done in the motion-based simulator where you had the Shuttle with the same orientation as we had for the launch, that is that crew members were lying on the back of their seat with their feet up.
NASA always gave a lot of importance to flight training, flight training in airplanes, and since the early space program, the Mercury Program, the Gemini, Apollo,
T-38s were used; it's originally a two-seat, two-jet engine training airplane for the US Force, but about 30 of these airplanes have been regularly used by NASA for the maintenance of the flight qualification of all astronauts, whether they were commanders, pilots, or even mission specialists who were flying in the back seats.
And also for travel: very flexible and fast travel provided by the T-38.
It was a lot of fun, but work at the same time, and you had to work very rigorously with the procedures and be systematic and do your flight planning and make your decisions during flight, if the weather was bad, you had to divert places, it was a good mental, physical, and operational training.
For Space Station training, an extensive use is made of the facility at the Johnston Space Center; it's a set of mock-ups of all of the elements of the International Space Station.
You have Node One here, you have the airlock.
In front of Node One you have the US Lab, then you have Node 2, and attached to the Node 2 are, on the port side, the Kybo Japanese Lab, on the starboard side, you have the Columbus Lab from ESA, so it's training for the use of these various facilities, accommodation, and you don't train the whole mission in these mock-ups, but you mainly train accommodation: the use of the restroom of your sleep facility for each crew member, that's where you find your place and you train the use of these various subsets of the International Space Station.
Well, the International Space Station is a multinational undertaking: you have the US, you have Russia, you have Canada, Japan, and the European countries, and the astronauts and the cosmonauts who are planned to be part of expedition on ISS, typically for six months at a time, trained in these various countries.
They train robotics in Canada first, and then they train robotics in an integrated manner to the Johnson Space Center; it's a lot of training in Russia for the Soyuz; training in Europe for the use of the Columbus system and possibly, for--, in the past, it was the reception of the automatic transfer vehicle, the resupply vehicle to ISS provided by ESA.
And of course, in the US, you trained in an integrated manner for all of these components that are put together at the Johnson Space Center.
Here you see Naoko Yamazaki,
JAXA astronaut, is training on the robotic workstation at the Johnson Space Center
She has on her right hand, the rotation hand controller for the robotic system, left hand--this is very standard-- was mentioned already several times, on the left hand she had the translation hand controller and she has the visuals of the motion of the robotic arm, and the payload attached to it through different monitors and cameras.
We also had a robotic workstation in the Cupola, which, of course, gave the astronaut or cosmonaut a direct view of the scene outside the Space Station.
This training at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany,
Samantha Cristoforetti, an Italian ESA astronaut training on the Columbus system, an experiment system, all related with the European experiment located in the Columbus module. on the forward part of the International Space Station, on the starboard side.
Now, in case of the Shuttle, whenever we were assigned to a flight, we had to do a lot of mission-specific preparation before really getting into training we had to do some evaluations.
This is part of the crew of ST-61, the first servicing mission of the Hubble Space Telescope which was planned for December 1993, and was executed at that time.
So for the year preceding this mission, we had to do first of all an evaluation of how we got to do the job, it had never been done before.
And you see Commander Dick Cavey, and Ken Bowersox, the pilot,
Katie Thornton, and myself, and in the background, in virtual reality, Jeff Hoffman.
And I'm here at the forefront, operating in a simulated environment the robotic arm, and moving Jeff Hoffman towards the telescope, to do a certain task.
So this was more of a strategy evaluation before the training started, on one hand, in the simulators, and also, in the water environment for spacewalking.
This is another version of the virtual reality.
When we started to use it in the early 90s, it was a relatively rustic virtual reality that became much more sophisticated, and later, you see here an astronaut having monitors in front of his eyes, with the scene, the space scene and the spaceship, and he can also see his hands, because you have sensors on his hands, so that here, you can see from outside his real physical hands, but he himself can see in virtual reality his virtual hands, moving, in order to accomplish certain tasks.
So the virtual reality lab has become very sophisticated at the Johnson Space Center, it's a very, very useful tool for, on one hand, evaluations of certain tasks to be performed, but then, also training for the astronauts.
Spacewalking, or EVA training is done in the US in a large facility called
The Neutral Buoyancy Lab.
And you see in front, an astronaut just before a training session in the water, and in this large basin, we had a module of the International Space Center, of various components of the International Space Station.
In the past, we also had a model, a pretty high fidelity model of the Hubble Space Telescope in preparation for the repair or the maintenance mission of the telescope.
The space suit being used here is very similar to the EMU, the extra vehicular mobility unit used in space.
What is important is that we always have the same differential pressure between the inside of the suit and the outside.
In the case of the EMU it is 4.3 pounds per square inche, or about a third of bar.
And it's important, in the water, to always keep that differential pressure at that value, because this is what determined the rigidity of the suit, and you want to train in an environment which had the rigidity very similar to the one that you are going to have in space.
So, in order to achieve that-- because if you go up and down in the water there was a rapid change in the pressure-- there is an umbilical that is linked to the suit and provides air under pressure in order to always maintain that differential pressure that you would have in space.
But the rest of the suit is very similar to the EMU.
This is a practicing the Hubble repair in the Neutral Buoyancy Lab.
You see a high fidelity model of the telescope on the right-hand side where astronauts are close to it, the so-called free floater.
A free floater means the astronaut who is not at the end of the robotic arm on the platform, so he or she has the responsibility of moving around using the hand rail, the yellow hand rail on the telescope, or at the payload bay, and also, locating himself or herself in the proper position to do the task.
The other one on the lower right-hand side is the so-called EV 1, the extra vehicular crew member number one who is on the platform at the end of the robotic arm.
And you see that he is holding a camera, inserted in the telescope, in a radial position, and you see his portable life support system on his back, and you see the umbilical system that is providing pressurized air, as I mentioned before, and also communication and cooling.
A similar training in the NBL is done, of course, for the International Space Station.
The Hubble Space Telescope repair mission is something of the past although it was a very fruitful activity and helped really prepare for the work to be done outside of the International Space Station and spacewalking, but here, you see an astronaut in the NBL, training for some operation in the International Space Station.
Of course, we have divers around, helping for the operation.
This is not specifically training, but it's to a certain degree, related to training.
This is the return of a crew from the International Space Station on the board of Soyuz, this was in the early March of 2016.
You have, Mikhail Kornienko on the left-hand side, in the middle you have Sergei Volkov and Scott Kelly on the right-hand side, and both Kornienko and Scott Kelly had spent one year in space, an this is a recovery post-touchdown of the Soyuz re-entry vehicle in Kazakhstan, east of Baikonur.
Of course, you have a lot of people around who came with helicopters, you have medical doctors, and officials, and so on.
And the crew is recovering, of course, two of them spent a long time in space, and even Sergey Volkov six months, which is quite a long time.
In order to be able to to be in a reasonably good shape when you come back, it's necessary for all ISS astronauts to spend quite a lot of time doing physical training; to the order of two hours per day, or 24 hours, in the Space Station.
So the crew is recovering, and, of course, they will go through a lot of medical checks and tests for several weeks, and will go back to normal life on planet Earth.
Basically, there is no long-term effect of spaceflight, even if you spent a few months in space, and possibly one year, although the one year-stay on ISS is something new, and the crew is still recovering from that, but no long-term effects from the point of view of bone mass loss, which is something that was happening in the past, when the astronauts and the cosmonauts didn't do a lot of physical training on board, but now, with the extensive physical training, and very rigorous, the bone loss mass, which was a problem in the past, is no longer a big problem now.
And muscle reconditioning is done by, again, physical exercise on the Earth, following return.
Of course, you have a reasonable amount of radiation dose, which you had during the six months in space, or one year; this is not a big problem per se, but of course, you cannot do many, many missions of six months or one year, one after the other.
There are sometimes some problems in the eyes; you have somewhat of a change in the geometry of eyes, so that you have possibly, some long term effect, which are not very severe, but require possibly, the use of glasses, or change of the characteristics of the glasses that you were wearing.
So no bad long-term effects following a long-duration spaceflight.
