Hello and welcome everyone.
Today's lesson is dedicated to the ecological restoration of protected areas.
We will have a look at the definition of ecological restoration, the principles and guidelines of ecological restoration of protected areas, an example of ecological restoration, and the process of ecological restoration for protected areas suggested by the World Commission on Protected
Areas.
To find out more, you could, in fact, refer to the document
Ecological Restoration for Protected Areas:
Principles, Guidelines, and Best Practices.
A document prepared by the World Commission on Protected Areas'
Ecological Restoration Taskforce on this topic.
During its Conference of the Parties, the twelfth session, the Convention on Biological Diversity has reaffirmed the necessity of reinforcing the support and the cooperation intended to promote ecosystem restoration efforts in developing countries.
All with the purpose of implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and meeting the Aichi Biodiversity Targets.
This is why the Convention on Biological Diversity has decided to expand and reinforce monitoring of the deterioration and restoration of ecosystems.
This is with the aim of supporting adaptive management and drawing up a report on the progress made on the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, and particularly on Targets 5, 14, and 15.
Definitions.
Ecological restoration is the process of assisting the recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded, damaged, or destroyed.
It is therefore an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of a previous ecosystem, that is old or recent regarding its specific composition, its community structure, its ecological functioning, the ability of the physical environment to support all of its living organisms, and its connectivity with the landscape.
This assumes and requires good knowledge of functional and adaptive ecology of targeted ecosystems, knowledge of the history of anthropogenic deterioration, and finally of choosing a reference ecosystem to guide planning, implementation, follow-up, and assessment of the restoration project.
The reasons and the targets for ecological restoration: restoration in, and around, a protected area contributes to a number of societal aims and objectives, which are linked to biodiversity conservation and human well-being.
The reasons for implementing restoration projects varies and can include, for example, the recovery of certain species, the reinforcement of an ecosystem function, or connectivity at the level of a terrestrial or marine landscape, the improvement of possibilities for tourist experiences, or even, the recovery or the improvement of diverse ecosystem services.
Restoration can contribute to the ability to adapt to climate changes by reinforcing resilience when faced with changes, and by supplying ecosystem services.
It can contribute to the easing of climate change by capturing carbon dioxide in ecosystems.
Climate change and other rapid global changes form new challenges for restoration and they highlight the need for adaptive management, as was highlighted in module four.
The World Commission on Protected Areas identifies three fundamental principles for the ecological restoration of protected areas.
Ecological restoration of a protected area must be: effective.
This means, effective ecological restoration is one that recovers and preserves the values of a protected area.
Efficient.
Efficient ecological restoration is one that maximizes positive results by minimizing time, resource and effort costs.
Commitment.
Ecological restoration of protected areas that induces commitment is one where partners and interested parties collaborate together, that favors participation, and that improves the visitors' experience.
Specific good practices which must be applied to a given project must be chosen during the planning and conception stages of the project.
Let's take the examples of ecological restoration introduced by Abdou Salam Kane from the Direction of the National Parks of
Senegal.
In 2006, thanks to a partnership with the
Danone Livelihood Fund, the project developed by Oceanium with the purpose of restoring an extremely degraded mangrove forest came about at the same time as the launch of the mangrove reforestation program along the Senegal coastline.
Mangroves, which used to be abundant along this coastline, have gradually disappeared after human intervention, from the rise in sea levels and from the drought.
The local population has seen its subsistence sources, especially food sources, disappear.
Over time with people stocking up shrimp farms, and in a general way, oyster farms, which used to be prosperous in mangroves, and with saltwater penetrating the soil, paddyfields have stopped producing.
To this day, nearly 150 million mangrove trees have been planted in nearly 500 villages at the Saloum Delta and in Casamance.
It is the largest world-wide program for mangrove reforestation with nearly 30,000 acres of mangroves having been planted.
Moreover in the Delta of the Senegal River, the Tocc Tocc community nature reserve, which is involved in the Lac de Guiers, is a continental area of permanent fresh water.
It is in the process of being restored by local communities with technical support from the Direction of the National Parks and a number of partners.
The result of the restoration efforts have enabled it to be recognized as a Ramsar site.
With global warming, the rising sea level, the Tocc Tocc community nature reserve's initiative and the one by Oceanium are all crucial projects, which guarantee the improvement of livelihoods, and which demonstrate the need to collaborate with nature in order to guarantee that the environment and populations, who depend on protected areas and wetlands for their livelihood, receive support for codevelopment activities.
The World Commission describes a seven stage process, recommended as a way of undertaking the ecological restoration of protected areas.
The stages are not strictly sequential, and some elements, like adopting adaptive management must occur throughout the whole project.
This process is placed in context through a series of diagrams and more conceptualized graphic boxes, which provide extra information.
To conclude, ecological restoration of protected areas contributes to reaching the global targets for biodiversity conservation.
It involves acting with caution and humility, and recognizing that ecological restoration is a complex and difficult process, and that us intervening can have unexpected consequences.
The World Commission on Protected Areas' approach for restoring protected areas is a policy framework based on a group of clear principles, which, rather than defining rigid processes, supports an approach favoring a holistic approach, large collaboration, careful planning, and thought-through implementation so as to obtain the desired results.
You can find out more by also reading the 69th edition of the NAPA letters, which summarizes the guidelines which helped me to prepare this lesson.
There, we have reached the end of this lesson.
The next episode will talk about the issues of gender and equity in managing protected areas.
Meanwhile, have an excellent day.
