Well, here we go.
Orion and Space Launch System.
This is the system that has been developed by NASA for journeys to the Moon,
Mars, and beyond.
So it's in full development now, it's built by the company Lockheed Martin, and here you see the so-called CM or crew module, or command module, similar to the command module of the Apollo spacecraft.
And here in the back, we have the ESA-developed SM, or service module.
Obviously, if you have missions in the vicinity of the Earth or the Moon, you could possibly go with such a spacecraft, although, if you want to land on the Moon, you need, in addition, a lunar lander, like we had in the Apollo program.
If you want to go to Mars, you need also an extension, you need a crew module for a long journey to the Red Planet, but this is the basic spacecraft that will allow the command of the journeys beyond the lower orbit of the Earth.
Well, we are at the end of March, 2016, when this video was recorded, and NASA recently published some details about Orion and about this Space Launch System.
And this is what motivated us to create this short video.
Here you see, on a mock-up at the Johnson Space Center, you see two crew members in the Shuttle-type launch and entry suit, the Orion suit, that are ingressing into the Orion module.
So this is the ingress and egress hatch on the right-hand side of the module, and you see the windows in the front here, and this is the reaction control system, whenever you have the crew module alone detached from the service module.
This is what you use to control the spacecraft in pitch, roll, and yaw, and also for doing translations of the module.
We're here we see some details of the Orion spacecraft module, and especially, the interface to the Space Launch System, which is a rocket that will take Orion to space, and that will be described later.
Now the front part is the so-called launched abort tower.
It's a system that has been used on all crewed-capsule programs, starting with Mercury, and Gemini, and Apollo.
You have this tower with the rockets here that will extract the crew module from the rocket, in case you have a big problem, a launch explosion at the launch, or unplanned trajectory that you can always escape, using this launch abort tower.
You have the crew module, or the command module here, with two up to six crew members, normally four; you have the service module in the back, and you have the spacecraft adapter adapting the module to the Space Launch System.
Some details here about the components of the Orion Spacecraft: again, the CM here, and the SM at the back, with the solar arrays, four solar arrays.
And you have the entry hatch on the side, the attitude control system of the command module itself, but you also have maneuver thrusters in the service module itself, as long the CM is attached to SM, the attitude control is done with the maneuvering thrusters of the SM.
Some more details here, but the combination of the CM, crew module and the service module and you can see the size in comparison with a human being here in the back of the SM, you have a few thrusters, you have the main propulsion system here, but you have, in addition, a few small thrusters, similar to the reaction control system of the Space Shuttle.
Now the service module will be provided by the European Space Agency, and this has been a decision done a few years ago.
ESA is actively working on the design and construction of the first service module, and you see the heritage with the ATV, the Automatic Transfer Vehicle.
Here, you have the ATV approaching the International Space Station from the back, with the four solar arrays a classical configuration that has been seen many times.
And you see that the service module of Orion provided by ESA has a very similar geometry, except that we have a thruster in the back, which we didn't have in the case of ATV.
This is a draft version of the control station of Orion, for the two crew members who will be in charge of the control out of the possibly four or six crew members total.
What is interesting is that you have a flat screen, which is also implemented in the modern fighters-- if you look at the F-18 or such modern fighters-- you have a similar control system.
You have here the translation hand controller which in its geometry is very similar to the THC of the Space Shuttle, used also for the control of the robotics from the International Space Station either the Cupola or the control station of the robotics in the US Lab.
For the rest, you have switches, switches that are always guarded, so that you don't inadvertently change the position in weightlessness.
Anyway, this is a draft version, it will certainly evolve, but that's what Lockheed Martin has come up with at this time.
We already talked about the missions of Orion, it's basically going beyond low-Earth orbits, to the Moon, Mars, and beyond.
One of the missions that could be performed relatively early would be, first of all, the capture of an asteroid in the vicinity of the Earth with the robotic spacecraft, and this asteroid will be brought in the vicinity of the Moon, either on the Moon's orbit or the Lagrange point L1 or L2, of the Earth-Moon system.
And then, a crewed Orion will be going toward the asteroid and the astronauts will be picking up pieces of the asteroid and doing some exploration of this big piece of rock captured by the robotic system.
That could be one of the first missions of Orion in the mid 20s.
In the bottom, you see the comparison of the size of Orion, and you see that is very similar in size, at least, as far as the crew module is concerned at least, with the Apollo spacecraft, and you see the comparison in size with the Dragon and with Soyuz.
Again, for Soyuz, you have the descent module here, you have the orbital module here, and the service module at the back.
SLS, the Space Launch System is a big rocket, Saturn V type developed by NASA and the aerospace industry in the US.
A very large rocket, it should be able to take about 70 tons to low-Earth orbits in the early version and up to 150 tons for the later versions.
If we look at the various stages, we have pretty much like, for the Shuttle, we have
LH2, a liquid hydrogen tank, this is the fuel; we have here the LOX tank, liquid oxygen.
This is pretty much like we had in the external tank of the Space Shuttle with the LOX at the top, and the LH2, much larger, in the bottom.
Two solid rocket boosters, which you see here, with one segment more than we had for the Space Shuttle, and these are the nozzles of the two solid rocket boosters. in the bottom of the cold stage we have four liquid hydrogen engines, pretty much like the Space Shuttle's main engines, but re-manufactured and improved liquid hydrogen engines.
On the top, we have the upper stage, that will provide the extra thrusters for taking the Orion crew module and service module to its destination beyond the low-Earth orbit and, as mentioned before, you have a crew module, and a service module and here we have four crew members and this is the escape tower with a little rocket that can allow extraction of the CM and CM only, in case we have a problem with the rocket at launch.
In the middle, and on the right-hand side you have some details of the upper part of the rocket here, and some details also about the propulsion system itself, and the LOX and the liquid hydrogen tanks.
This is the launch of Space Launch System with the Orion on the top, and this is something that hopefully, will be reasonably a common view in 10, 15, 20 years from now, and the ones of you who want to become astronauts, you may be able to ride on top of that rocket someday.
I wish it for you.
