The future of space utilization and exploration,
I should say in fact, the present and the future, because space utilization is being done now extensively and will continue to be done.
One of the important aspects of space utilization is monitoring of the Earth, measurements of resources of planet Earth, and also the monitoring of weather systems.
As you can see here, you have a typhoon, a tropical cyclone over the Pacific threatening the Philippines and you see here a little bit further south
Java and Singapore at this place,
India here and Africa on the far left.
But the monitoring of weather system is very important, because it allows a precise weather forecast on one hand and in the case of... a phenomenon like a tropical cyclone, hurricanes in the Atlantic and typhoons in the Pacific, you can order evacuations which are very important to save lives and property.
Precise navigation system GPS style, but this is of course another very important utilization of space.
The GPS system is quite mature.
The Galileo system, the European equivalent is in the process of being put in place.
In 2020, we should have about 30 satellites in the European Galileo system to provide a precise navigation.
And of course similar system are existing for Russia, for China and India also to a certain degree, but these systems will continue to be improved and updated in the future.
A very important part of utilization of space.
Communication obviously, is another important part of connected world.
More and more we are tending towards a connection of all parts of planet Earth, using high-speed internet and voice communication and others and in fact you have,
I would say three segments.
You have the segment in the geostationary orbit,
36 thousand kilometers above the Earth's surface, a lot of communication satellites are there.
Then you have more and more utilization of communication satellite on low Earth orbit, of course much closer to the Earth and providing broadband internet at a very high rate.
The third segment, which is becoming more and more current is the utilization of high flying airplanes.
They can be solar airplanes in the stratosphere: in the high or low stratosphere, providing similar service to the one of the LEO satellite, satellite on low Earth orbit but at a lower cost, and of course you have the mast on the surface of the Earth.
So the space segment is basically this segment here from low Earth orbit to geostationary orbit, providing communication capabilities in a connected world.
Space solar power is a concept that exists since decades already, has never been implemented really, because of the high cost of access to space, but the day we'll have lower cost for access to space, this is a possibility of generating power in space using solar radiation transforming to electrical power and then beaming down the energy in the form of microwave for instance, to focus the region on the Earth's surface.
This is a dream, may become a reality some day.
Is not at that time, but I'm pretty sure that it will to a certain degree be implemented in the future.
The advantage, of course, is that you have constant solar energy beaming on this facility except maybe for some short eclipses, but basically you have most of the time power from the-- radiation power from the Sun that can be used as opposed to such a facility on the Earth, where you have day and night and you have weather and you have a lot of reason why the efficiency is not 100 percent.
Such a system, although expensive to put in place, of course would be much better in that respect, you have nearly constant solar power in space.
As fas as the astrophysics and exploration using scientific instruments in space, the near future, I would say the near to intermediate future, is dominated by the James Webb Space Telescope, sometimes mentioned as the successor to Hubble, although of course it will have much higher capabilities.
It will work in another wavelength range, the infrared versus the visible, plus little bit of infrared, little bit of UV for the Hubble Space Telescope.
The James Webb would be a really infrared telescope located quite far from the Earth,
1.5 million kilometers, so on the L2 Lagrange point of the Sun Earth system, it's going to be a very cold instrument about 40 K and we'll be there to investigate very far away objects and look in space as far as we ever can look, look at either exoplanets or very far away galaxies.
It's a joint project of NASA, the European Space Agency and the Canadian Space Agency, launch planned in 2018 with Ariane 5 from French Guiana.
NASA is developing a new capsule for exploration.
Basically this is for the Moon and beyond, for Mars and other destination in the solar system.
The ORION capsule should carry four people to far away destinations beyond the low Earth orbit, starting 2018, 2019 for the first test, then it will be using the SLS Space Launch System rocket to go to far away destination.
We'll have another video a little later where we'll detail the ORION system and the SLS.
The rise of commercial space, you have several commercial companies, that are providing now, and will provide in the future, space systems.
One interesting one is Bigelow Aerospace, which has been developing over the past few years inflatable modules that can be used for either creating a small space station which you see on the left-hand side with two ORION capsules attached to both sides of the small space station with inflatable modules or it can used also for a lunar base as you can see on the right-hand side.
This is for the future, but commercial space is really rising as a very capable partner in the future.
We are now at the end of March 2016 and in a few weeks from now we'll have the first
BIgelow inflatable module, which you see here on this picture, that will be taken on a Dragon capsule provided by SpaceX, taken to the International Space Station, will be docked to ISS and will be tested as a future possibility of providing space for either equipment or personnel on low Earth orbit or beyond.
So the first test of a Bigelow module will be some time in April 2016 on ISS.
