Hello and welcome to this lesson, dedicated today to a problem, we regularly encounter in managing protected areas: corruption and trafficking, which goes hand in hand with it.
Of course, this is not the only sector where this phenomenon exists, but its influence on numerous failures in parks and reserves is such that we wanted to make it a specific topical issue.
In addition to this lesson, you can find more information on this phenomenon on the websites shown on this picture, which discuss the subject and give you at least some solutions.
So for this lesson, a specialist from EAGLE
Network will help us.
EAGLE are eco-activists for governance and law enforcement.
We have Luc Mathot, who is based in Libreville, in Gabon.
So the first question to ask ourselves is whether this phenomenon of corruption is a significant problem in our protected areas.
I work mostly in Central Africa.
In each protected area, if you have 20 or
30 eco-guards, there will be at least one who is corrupt, but actually sometimes, it tends to be the other way round: one of twenty who is not corrupt.
I don't have the evidence, but in every protected area there are always corrupt eco-guards.
It's inevitable.
I am not only talking about eco-guards, it is the gendarmes around them, etc.
Salaries are not always very high, the temptation is very strong.
They give you one or two million.
The question is, "What does corrupt mean?"
Is it someone who let's through a little meat, or who closes his eyes to game coming through or is it someone who organizes the trafficking?
So there really are several levels of corruption and complicity.
I don't know if it starts at the top or the bottom, but it is at all levels.
We have had water and forestry agents implicated.
In Gabon, there was a captain in the Gendarmerie that we had arrested with ivory.
He was selling ivory himself, it was in his official car.
A prefect has been arrested, he did seven months in jail, a sub-prefect, so it can be at all levels.
We have had cases... we have had eco-guards, for example, or the managers of protected areas are corrupt.
You should know that traffickers, poachers have money.
It is of course for profit that they take part in trafficking and so they have a tendency to get close to eco-guards, to get close to managers to corrupt them, to offer them money.
So either it is a bit organized like that or maybe a little opportunistic.
Eco-guards who catch a poacher, a trafficker of ivory or something else, automatically, the poacher will try to corrupt the eco-guard or the manager of the protected area who caught him, so we have had a lot of cases in North Congo,
Cameroon, they are eco-guards who have been arrested who have gone to prison and who have been convicted.
So it is important to look at this problem and that the eco-guards and managers of protected areas are ready to react.
You can also find recent information on the species that are the most exposed to trafficking and the consequences that it has on their conservation in the leaflets published by EAGLE Network.
Let's now look with Luc at the main challenges of wildlife trafficking in Africa.
We are always talking about the problems of means, of capacity, we don't have enough cars, we don't have enough money...
The real problem, is actually the lack of real political will and corruption, even collusion.
It is not that traffickers of ivory or other things, are really strong, organized.
We are not at the level of drug trafficking with armed men who shoot at you at any time...
We could stop the trafficking.
We really could stop it.
If on our side, we had really honest, effective teams... and they were competent, because often we work with eco-guards, water and forestry agents who are not used to fighting against trafficking.
So, we must work with specialists, agencies who fight against drug trafficking, cocaine trafficking.
The same agencies can fight against ivory trafficking.
That's what we did, that's the opportunity we had in Togo, where now it is the anti-drug agency which works on ivory.
And for them ivory is like cocaine, and now we have much more effective results, real legal procedures, real investigations.
An eco-guard, a water and forestry agent is not even used to arresting someone, to taking him to prison, to taking him in front of a prosecutor, the code of criminal procedure, he can't master it.
So there is this problem of competence and then that of corruption,
I have already talked a lot about it, but we think it really is the biggest problem.
A subject, we talk a lot about at the moment, is ivory trafficking.
How is the struggle against this phenomenon going?
In the case of ivory, if we talk about corruption, it is a special case but similar, it is a special case in that the amounts involved are large.
You sometimes seize three or four tons of ivory, that represents three or four million of Euros in Asia.
And when there is more money, it is easier to corrupt.
There is a lot of complicity, a lot of corruption, obviously.
Certain countries like Botswana, which is the least corrupt in Africa along with the Seychelles, there is very little trafficking.
There are 200,000 elephants, something like that, in Namibia as well.
You realize that a lot of States say, "It's not our fault, we are an African State.
It is because there is demand for ivory from the Chinese."
Yes, that is true, but why in Botswana, why in Namibia, is there much less trafficking than in Central Africa, than in West Africa?
It's because they are the countries which are more watchful, where there is less corruption, in which the law is more vigorously applied.
There is also a lack of political will.
You hear all the time that a certain country has signed agreements, there are laws, they want to fight, there are action plans, strategies, workshops...
I almost want to say each month, in any case each year, but overall on the ground, nothing changes.
There is not really a political will.
The elephant is also an animal that is a little anachronistic, which causes damage, which is not always welcomed by populations.
This has perhaps some consequences for political will, but I think that it is above all because there are financial issues behind this pro-ivory lobbying.
And of course, there is always corruption.
So concretely, are there solutions to this problem?
Again, solutions to improve slightly the fight against wildlife trafficking, it would be, as I said just before, to work with specialists in the fight against trafficking.
Not biologists, not water and forestry agents nor eco-guards, but people who have worked on drug trafficking, on mass trafficking, human trafficking.
So they are much more effective.
They can work day and night, they are used to that.
They are used to dealing with legal procedures, arresting people, interrogating people.
Most of the water and forestry agents in all countries, they finish work at 4pm-5pm,
Often also they don't feel strong, they are not armed, they are not trained for that.
So again, working with the most competent structures and then anticipating corruption, knowing if we arrest a trafficker, we know very well that there will be someone, maybe even a lot of people, who he will call to get this person released, maybe because they received money, or he's a friend, maybe because they do business together etc.
So you must anticipate the corruption.
To illustrate all this, let's look in more detail at EAGLE's action on the ground.
We try above all to work with the national authorities in Africa so that they can increase the degree of law enforcement.
EAGLE's work can be resumed in four points.
We have the investigation: we identify or localize the traffickers and we gather a maximum amount of evidence against them, traffickers of ivory in particular, wildlife in general.
Then we put pressure on the authorities to... facilitate the arrest of these traffickers.
Always caught in the act or almost always in the act with the ivory in their hands, so whilst they are selling the ivory or panther skins or live animals.
And then, there is the legal side.
We have the legal experts who follow the case with the authorities, who check that records haven't gone missing.
Sometimes, a file goes missing, a clerk takes the file, it can then no longer be found...
We check all that, we follow the case to court with our teams of legal experts but also our lawyers who are there to defend the water and forests, to defend governments.
And then there is the media side, we broadcast all the results.
We inform the public, the authorities at the same time, to also dissuade potential traffickers.
So it is on these four points, that we really put a strong emphasis in the fight against corruption.
This is the end of this lesson.
The next episode will be an introduction to the Ramsar Convention, which deals with wetlands.
Have a great day!
