Hello and welcome to everyone, today's class is about Ramsar Convention on wetlands.
We're going to review the presentation of the Convention, organs, missions, pillars and international organizations that are partners with the convention.
For more informations, you can check the website of the convention for more details.
Wetlands are a public good that we ought to protect, they contains 80 per cent of biodiversity.
They have a major role in the regeneration of water resources and the preservation of biodiversity.
The convention on wetlands is the framework of international cooperation and national action for conservation and rational use of wetlands.
It's also called Ramsar Convention from the name of the Iranian city where it was adopted in 1971.
About 80 percent of UN member states are contracting parties of the Ramsar Convention.
The convention adopted a large definition of wetlands including all lakes and rivers, underground aquifers, swamps and marshes, wet grasslands, peatlands, oases, estuaries, deltas and tidal flats, mangroves and other coastal areas, costal reefs, and all human-made sites such as fish ponds, rice paddies fields, reservoirs, salt pans.
Organs of the convention : the application of Ramsar Convention is the result of a permanent partnership between contracting parties,
169 on the date of 10 June 2015.
The permanent committee is the secretariat of the convention that benefits from advice of a subsidiary organ of experts, a scientific and technical review panel and the support of the program on communication, capacity building, education, participation and awarness.
Every three years, representatives of the contracting parties gather in a conference, as the supreme political organ of the convention, adopting resolutions in order to administrate the work of the Convention and to improve the means required by the parties in order to achieves its goals.
The mission of the Convention is the conservation and the rational use of wetlands by actions, on a local, regional and national scale, plus international cooperation in order to contribute to the realisation of sustainable development in the entire world.
In accordance with the three pillars of the
Convention, contracting parties commit to :
- Work for the rational use of every wetlands in the framework of national plans, politics and laws, management measures, and education of the public.
- To register appropriate wetlands on the list of wetlands of international importance, called, again, Ramsar List and to take care of their governance.
- To cooperate on the international level for cross-border wetlands, shared wetlands systems, shared spaces and development projects that could effect wetlands.
What do wetlands do, and what could happen to them.
They stock water, and guarantee its quality, contributing to resilience against drought.
They protect against flooding and storm effects.
They provide food and other services such as transport and leisure.
They offer different types of housing for biodiversity and play a key role in biological cycles for numerous species, and in annual migration structures.
Under the pressure of a growing demand from a human population in expansion, wetlands are deteriorated and disappear.
Excessive exploitation of the latest wetlands threatens more and more their ability to provide essential services.
To counter this, we must ensure rational use of wetlands and the water they contain, restore degraded wetlands, and if necessary, create new ones to regain the services that we need.
Listen to Ania Grobicki, general secretary of Ramsar for the functioning of the convention.
The most important body of the Ramsar Convention of wetlands is the conference of the parties, the COP which meets every three years to decide on the key strategic directions of the convention.
In between the COP, the standing committee meets annually to guide the convention, it is composed of the regional representatives of each region of the six regions of the convention.
There is a scientific and technical review channel, the STARP which is a group of scientific and technical experts who publish important guidelines on the conservation and wise use of wetlands.
Finally, at a global level, the Ramsar Convention secretariat is based in Gland, Switzerland, and manages the everyday activities of the Convention, which includes publishing the Convention documents and administrating the Ramsar sites of international importance.
On a national level, the administrative authority in each country implements the strategic directions of the
Convention in that country and the national wetlands commitee which are multi-stakeholder platforms include the private sector,
NGO and civil society to support the government in implementing the Convention.
Finally, under the sustainable development goals the Convention is in charge of with monitoring the extent of wetlands worlwide.
Thank you very much.
Ramsar Convention recognises six International
Organizations Partners that provide specialized technical assistance and advice, in accordance with the principles of the Convention.
They are :
Birdlife International, the International water Management Institute, the International union for conservation of nature,
Wetland international, WWF international and
WWT.
The Convention is in collaboration with a network of partners.
Listen to Anada Tiega, former general secretary of Ramsar Convention, about relations between protected areas and wetlands.
Links between wetlands and protected areas are close.
Actually, it's because wetlands bring water to biodiversity and every protected areas which goal is the conservation of biodiversity include wetlands as an essential part.
Because they are used as habitat, and also as a place for reproduction, for breeding little ones and bringing survival.
In fact, if we take a look, for instance, at the world heritage in those natural sites, every one of them have wetlands as a crucial part.
The MAB system for biosphere reserves also include wetlands, in their central part.
Finally, Ramsar sites are exclusively wetlands.
Those Ramsar sites exist in order to protect species, every endemic migrant vulnerable species in danger of extinction.
To conclude, wetlands are crucial for sustainable development because they provide the water we need.
Wetlands are the cradle of biological diversity and provide water and primary productivity, that an incalculable number of plant and animal species rely on for their survival.
Ramsar Convention is one of the only one to take in account a special type of natural environment.
That's it, we're at the end of the lesson, next episode will be a conclusion of the course called topicality and conservation.
Looking forward to it, I wish you a good day.
