Well, it's time to conclude after several months of preparation and execution of the more than 15 hours of recording of the MOOC.
I would like to express my gratitude to several organizations and key people who made this possible.
First of all, let me mention the Swiss Space Center, and, in particular, the Director of the Swiss Space Center
Professor Volker Gass, who suggested the idea of having my course put on MOOC, more than a year ago.
And this is where we are located in Switzerland, this is Lausanne, in Switzerland, a medium-size town, this is Lake Leman, or Lake Geneva, and at the end of the yellow arrow you have EPFL, the Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, Switzerland, and the Swiss Space Center hosted within EPFL.
And, of course, you have the Space Shuttle, overflying nearly the Swiss Space Center, just missed it by few tens of miles.
This was on a STS-114 mission in the summer of 2005.
The flight was commanded by Eileen Collins, a woman commander, and again, she tried to come over the Swiss Space Center, and missed it by a few miles.
The Shuttle is just over the Jura Mountains which are north of Lausanne, and this is the Lake Neuchatel, in the north part of French-speaking part of Switzerland.
Now, we have two absolutely key people for the success of this MOOC:
Lise-Loup and Julien.
Lise-Loup was in command of the whole preparation and execution of the MOOC, she was the manager of the whole project.
It was a full-time job for six months, or even more.
Thanks, Lise-Loup, for a wonderful job!
And Julien, at the same time as he was preparing for his master level exams at EPFL, and passing these exams.
He worked a lot on the specific videos; we prepared together the videos and he did most of the graphics, the selection of the pictures; thanks, Julien.
So, Lise-Loup and Julien are absolutely key people for the success of this MOOC.
For me, a little bit more in the shadow, but extremely important, were Camille and Thibault, two PhD students at EPFL, and they are the ones who did all the quizzes and the tests.
They proposed the questions, although we worked together on these sometimes, and they gave all the answers.
So my hat is down to Camille and Thibault.
They put a lot of work on this on parallel with the PhD work here at EPFL.
We hope that everything went well with the quizzes and the tests, for whatever went well was thank to Camille and Thibault; if there were any problems with the quizzes and tests, it was my fault, sorry.
Another key person was Matthew, the video editor, here at the MOOC recording station at EPFL.
And here you see Matthew, together with Lise-Loup, who, by the way, in addition to managing the whole project did all the interviews, a lot of work, a lot of preparation for the interviews themselves.
And she ran the interviews herself.
And this is the whole EPFL MOOC team except Thibault who I mentioned before, and Gilles, the recording studio technician.
This is in the studio itself-- you see the recording table here, where most of the work was done.
And obviously, all of this would not have been possible without the support of the edX team, so thanks a lot to all these people who work at edX, or wherever they are in the world.
Last but not least, thanks to all the learners, the students, the MOOC students, for your participation.
From all over the world, we had nearly 7,000 participants, and wherever you see a light on this map of planet Earth during the night, you have people and you have students of this MOOC.
And this is your teacher, Claude, and I had a few bad days in my life, not too many, fortunately, but I had a few, and this is not a really bad day, but this is a potentially bad day during the preparation for STS-46, the first flight of the Tethered Satellite; you see the crew here, in the studio, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, with the Commander Lauren Shriver, and we had real concerns about the behavior of the Tethered in space.
When you have an object like a spacecraft, the station or Shuttle, or Soyuz, it's pretty solid and it behaves in a predictable way, but we didn't know how the tether would behave during this mission, especially in the case of the tether cut, so in the studio, we played the scenario where the tether breaks, and then the crew gets a really bad day, including myself.
But I had a lot of good days also in my life.
And many, many good days were when I was flying in the Swiss Airforce Hawker Hunter.
This is the handle for commanding the ejection seat.
I never had to use it in my life-- fortunately, thanks God-- it means that I had many landings as I had take offs, so I flew the Hawker Hunter a lot of good days.
I must say I had also a lot of good days during this MOOC, and together with a bunch of very talented people, and good people, and doing this MOOC was a big pleasure in my life, and a lot of good days.
Well, this is going to be a brief summary of the main subjects covered in the course.
Of course, I won't cover everything, you can look again at the videos if you want to refresh your memory on some aspects of the course, but I go quickly through the key subjects that were covered.
After the review of the laws of mechanics, we talked about the transition from atmosphere to space, you remember that is a slow transition, there is a boundary, a so-called Karman line at 100 km, which delineates the realm of the aeronautics below 100 kilometers, and astronautics, above.
But, as you know, also above 100 km, you still have a lot of particles, and a lot of breaking for low-Earth orbit satellites, which have a limited life time.
We went to talk about gravitational wells, and I took the definition of the gravitational well that is given in Arthur Clarke's book.
And you remember that the depth of the gravitational well of the Earth is a radius of the Earth, and that all of the gravitational wells of all the other celestial bodies, whether they are big and massive, or small and light mass, are refered to this depth of the gravitational well of the Earth equal to its radius.
And you see on the left-hand side a very, very shallow gravitational well of the Moon that has a shot of about 400 km.
So, try to keep that concept in your mind, is a very useful concept to imagine the energy needed to come out of the gravitational influence of various celestial bodies, in the Solar System or beyond.
Then we went to talk about orbits, the Kepler’s laws and elliptical orbits, and other shapes.
We talked about Hohmann transfer, how to go from one circular
orbit to another one, whether it's to a larger orbit or to a smaller orbit.
We went then to talk about special orbits, that are really used a lot in the practical exploitation of the space, typically, the geostationary orbits on the Equator,
46,000 km away from the Earth surface; circular orbits, used for communication.
We talked about Sun-sychronous orbits, we discussed the subject of nodal regression which allows the sun synchronous orbits, and at the end of this unit, we talked about the Lagrange points;
L1, L2, L3, L4, L5.
You remember that we have L3, which is a little bit beyond the orbit of the Earth.
We have L1 and L2, which are
1.5 million km away from the Earth in the respectively Sun direction, anti-Sun direction; and L4, L5 are making equilateral triangles with two main bodies which are the Sun and the Earth.
We covered then the subject of the rendezvous.
In order to avoid having too much mathematics and complex equations to do the calculation,
I derived some simplified expressions, typically if you are at a certain distance below as a chaser, below the orbit of the target, then you move towards the target and below the orbit of the target, at a certain rate, and derived some linear expressions in order to make the calculations easier.
But the main purpose was really to understand this relative orbit of the chaser of the target, which are kind of loops, and when you are right here, relatively close to the target, which is here, in the center of the coordinate system which is a reference coordinate system for the motion of the chaser versus a target.
At this point, you need to increase the energy of your orbit so that after one full orbit and an hour and a half later, you can be in the vicinity of the target,
A pretty big subject was of course the interplanetary trajectories.
You remember we divided these in thee parts.
We have what's happening in the vicinity of the Earth, inside the sphere of influence of the Earth.
Then we shrunk this to this point, then we have a heliocentric trajectory taking us pretty much a Hohmann transfer taking us towards the target planet, which is here.
Then we looked at what’s happening within the sphere of influence of the target so we divided this kind of trajectory in three steps to make it easier for calculation, and we get pretty precise results this way.
Propulsion and attitude control: we looked at what's happening here in the bottom of Soyuz rocket going to space.
Remember the important concept of specific impulse, and the relationship with exhaust velocity of the thruster; then altitude control, this is for the Mercury spacecraft.
We have a pitch, yaw, and roll, and we looked at some details of the attitude control, the Shuttle, using the rotation hand controller, and you have the applicable illustration on the upper right.
At the end we covered some special subjects and, in particular, we covered the tethered satellites, which is something that I had the privilege of experiencing with my fellow crew members on two occasions.
In 1992, STS-46, and 1996, STS-75, with some success, especially on the second mission.
I talked about quite a lot of details on tethered satellites, because I think it's an interesting application of the laws of mechanics and electrodynamics in space, and it's quite a rich field which is not ended.
I'm sure that there will be such applications in the future.
I talked about the Space Shuttle, the International Space Station.
On the upper right, you have Ariane 6, which was a new launch developed by the European Space Agency and it should be operational in a few years from now.
In the bottom right, we talked about Orion, and beyond the lower orbit, the capsule vehicle, that it developed by NASA and the aerospace industry in the US.
Well, I asked you to remember the concepts: you remember, this course is mainly a concept course,
I'd like you to really, really have these concepts pretty solid in your mind.
This is a basic--it's not a course that goes very deep into space technology, it's a mission-designed course, and not a spacecraft-designed course, but the concepts, I'd like you to keep them in your mind, pretty solid.
You may want to become an astronaut also.
I was very happy to be one, and very privileged;
I felt privileged to be able to go into space on a few occasions, four times in the 90s.
We have a new selection now, in the United States, the so-called class of 2017. it's going to be the group number 22 of the US astronauts.
This application is very popular, and we had so far, 18,300 applicants for this application, so if you are a candidate for this application, obviously you are not alone, but at the same, is very rejoicing because iе means that space is extremely popular, and I think that the perspective of going to the Moon, and going to Mars, and other objects in the Solar System is very attractive, and by all means, sign up, and if you are elsewhere than in the US, if you are in Russia, in China, in India, in Europe, sign up for any astronaut selection in the future, near future or far-away future.
You can be sure that there will always be work to do in the low Earth orbit for astronauts and cosmonauts and the International Space Station should be operational until, at least, 2024.
And beyond the ISS, it's possible that we'll have other low Earth orbit stations that are not conceived yet, but I am pretty sure that we will always exploit the capabilities, and the observations, and the possibilities of the low Earth orbits.
On the left-hand side, you have Tim Peake, the British ESA astronaut training on the robotic workstation in the US Lab.
And you see him coming out of the airlock of ISS on the upper right, and during his spacewalk, in the lower right.
ISS is a very productive and good environment for doing research in space.
And a lot of the research is related to capabilities for humans to go beyond the low Earth orbits in the next years, or the next decades.
And one very positive sign was that plants are growing reasonably well in weightlessness and we even had recently a flower blooming in the ISS.
The views of the Earth from the low Earth orbit are always very spectacular.
We have a lot of time lapse videos that have been published recently by various astronauts, US,
Russian, and from other nations.
And all these pictures, and videos are really, really spectacular.
This is a nice view that was published recently, we are now at the end of March, 2016, from ISS, the Mediterranean Sea, and Cairo, from the Station, you see here, Cairo, and the Delta of the Nile, you have Israel, and the Mediterranean Sea with low clouds and the Moon illuminating the whole landscape pretty far down on the left hand side.
And a beautiful view of the Mount Fuji from the International Space Station.
As mentioned before, the low Earth orbit is one thing and there will always be work to be done on LEO, but the Moon and beyond, this will happen, and the Moon is not a bad place to go either.
This is a nice view from the NASA Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter low flying over the Moon, with the Earth on the background.
Superb.
There will be further away destinations, beyond the Moon.
This is the asteroid Ceres, detail from the Dawn spacecraft which was mentioned on a previous video. it's kind of a dead world, no atmosphere, obviously, but again, this would be the subject of exploration, visits, exploration and utilization also, extracting resources from our near-by celestial bodies, planets, or asteroids.
The planet Mars is obviously a key destination for robotics and human space flights over the next few decades, and here you have a set of four beautiful pictures recorded by the Mars Reconnaissance orbiter of NASA, showing dunes, and craters, and ridges, and it's really a fantastic, extremely interesting world that will soon be explored by humans.
And good luck to all of you in your future studies and careers.
Stay motivated and have fun!
