We now approach the fourth and last module dedicated to applications of Bernoulli's principle. 
We will see an extremely important application hydraulics with free surface, it is the notion of backwater curves.
We will see an equation called
« equation of backwater curves » that allows to calculate the variation of water height in a channel.
To do so, we will consider a channel with a certain slope, we will assume that we are working at constant flow rate and that the variation of water height is continuous along my channel.
We will see that we can, with this equation of the backwater curve, calculate exactly the variation of height as a function of the distance.
Unfortunately, this hypothesis of continuous variation is not true in certain cases.
It is for example what happens with a waterfall with which we will have a brutal variation of the water height and we will have the transition of a subcritical regime to a supercritical regime.
The inverse case, transition of a supercritical regime with a weak water height to a subcritical with a strong water height, this transition is called a hydraulic jump and here again it results in a brutal variation of water height over a distance relatively short.
We will not be able to do the hypothesis of continuous variation.
Let's see now the notion of backwater curve, i.e. the variation of water height compared to the bottom of a channel as a function of the distance.
I consider a small elementary volume of length dx between two points A and B.
We assume that the height varies in a continuous way between A and B.
I will use Bernoulli's principle that allows me to write the conservation of head between the points A and B.
In fact, we will take into account a slight head loss that will be proportional to the distance dx.
I will add 2 hypotheses.
The first one is the one of a steady state.
The flow rate is equal to the product uh, the flow rate per unit of width is constant.
The second hypothesis is continuity.
We are working in a regime gradually varying, i.e. the water height varies continuously between points A and B and the energy dissipation dh is proportional to the distance between these two points.
We can write that the energy dissipation, the head loss, is proportional to the length multiplied by a coefficient, we have seen that the coefficient was called the energy slope.
I have a sign minus because it is an energy dissipation.
The equation of the backwater curve can be obtained in a way relatively simple by differentiating this equation of Bernoulli with respect to x.
If we differentiate Bernoulli's equation, we obtain the three following terms : the differential of the elevation allows to obtain the angle of inclination of the channel.
Here, we have the differential of h with respect to x, h being what we are looking to calculate.
Here we have the differential of the kinetic energy and we will use the fact that we are in a steady state. u = q over h, so I will substitute here u by u over h. Then I will suppose that I can calculate the head loss by knowing the friction slope and by using an empirical formula, for example, Manning-Strickler's.
After a few mathematical manipulations, this equation here can be changed under this form here.
We see appearing the ratio q squared over g h cubed and it is easy to be convinced that this ratio is nothing else than the Froude number squared.
I can put my equation of backwater curve under the following form where
I make appear a ratio between a numerator and a denominator.
The numerator is equal to the difference between the friction slope jf that reflects the head loss and the channel's slope.
The denominator is a function of the Froude number, equal to the Froude number squared minus 1.
This equation that governs the h variations, is a first-order non-linear differential equation.
Non linear because here intervenes the Froude number raised to the square, so we have a non linear variation of h, first order equation because the differential is of the first order.
We will need one and only one condition at the boundaries to solve this differential equation.
We will see right after what boundary condition we must consider.
A few comments : the first one concerns what is happening when the numerator N is equal to 0.
As we are in a steady state, the flow rate is constant, when N is equal to 0, it means that the height is constant and so we have a height a flow rate constant so we are in a uniform steady state.
When D(h) tends to 0, so that the Froude number tend to 1, then D(h) over D(x) tends to infinity, we will thus have like a vertical tangent, so a variation extremely brutal of the water height over a very short distance.
We will thus quit the frame of our hypotheses.
I recall that we were assuming to have a slow and continuous variation of the water height as a function of the distance.
When such a case occurs, that the Froude number tends to 1, that the denominator here tends to 0, and that the height tends to infinity, we are beyond the field of application of the backwater curve.
We will see right after how to deal this case.
Before approaching the question relatively delicate of the boundary condition that we must give to our equation of backwater curve, we must give a few physical notions on the propagation of information for a water flow.
Let's consider firstly the basic case where we have water at rest and we have a small water thickness.
We are thus in the frame of hypothesis called « shallow water regime » and in this case, the waves at the surface of the water follow an equation called
« equation of linear waves ».
The demonstration is beyond the scope of this course but the usable result is the following, it is relatively important : we will have waves that will propagate at the same velocity, equal to the square root of gh, h being the water height.
We have some here plus or minus, so we will have velocities that propagate in two opposite directions.
As we are in a scope of linear approximation, if the water, instead of being at rest, is in motion, with an average velocity u, the velocities will superimpose and so the propagation velocity of the wave at the water surface will be equal to the water velocity + the water velocity in shallow water at rest.
The propagation velocity of the wave, of the intumescence, c, will be equal to the water velocity + this velocity equal to plus or minus square root of gh.
If I put square root of gh as a factor,
I can show that c is equal to square root of gh multiplied by the Froude number plus or minus 1.
Let's now look at the behavior of the waves as a function of the Froude number.
In the case of a subcritical regime, when the Froude number is smaller than 1, we have a negative propagation velocity, a propagation velocity here positive, so the waves will propagate in the opposite directions.
Physically, it means that if
I distrub the flow at a given place, the perturbations will propagate in the positive and negative directions, among other things, we will have perturbations that going back from the downstream to the upstream.
In the case of a subcritical regime, we must fix the boundary condition of the backwater curve equation at the downstream.
Conversely, here we have a supercritical regime, the Froude number is greater than 1.
In this case, we see that the velocity in the 2 cases,  of the waves is positive, they are propagating in the same direction but have different velocities.
If I disturb at a given place the flow, we will have perturbations that will systematically move from the upstream towards the downstream but that will never go back up the upstream.
In this case, the boundary condition that must be fixed will be at the upstream.
I state for the record the case of the critical regime when the Froude number is equal to 1.
In this case, the waves' velocity tends to 0 but we have seen that this corresponded also to the case where the height tends towards the critical height, where the denominator of the equation of the backwater curve tends to 0 and we have a discontinuous variation of the water height, so it is a case with no big interest.
Let's look a couple of examples of the backwater curve.
We will mainly try to reason in a qualitative way.
Let's imagine that we have to solve the backwater curve equation over a certain range 0 L.
To do so, I give myself a friction law, here a law of Manning-Strickler that calculates the friction slope jf.
Firstly, knowing the flow rate, being in a steady state, knowing the Manning-Strickler law, we can calculate the critical height.
The height that corresponds to a Froude number equal to 1 and the normal height that was defined as being the asymptotic height the water height towards which should tend the uniform steady state.
Asymptotically, we must always have the water height that tends towards the normal.
In a subcritical regime, we must place the boundary condition at the downstream.
Here in point L.
If I put a boundary condition between the critical height and the normal height, if I look at the sign of the numerator and the denominator,
I observe that the numerator is positive, the denominator is negative, so I must have dh or dx negative, so a decreasing function.
As I fix a boundary condition at the downstream, I will integrate the differential equation from the downstream to the upstream, so in a decreasing direction.
I must tend to my normal height so the backwater curve in a qualitative way must tend to this normal height.
In a supercritical regime, instead of having the normal height above the critical height
I have the inverse case : the critical height above the normal height.
In this case, we show that the numerator is negative, the denominator is positive and being in supercritical regime, we must fix the boundary condition at the upstream, here at point 0.
In this case, I must observe that I must have my height that must tend to the asymptotic height, so the normal height, so I must have a curve that qualitatively must vary like this.
Here we have a case relatively simple of continuous variation of the backwater curve.
Let's place ourselves now in a case slightly different. 
I will still consider a subcritical and supercritical regime.
I will place a boundary condition here greater than the normal height, in the subcritical case, and here at the critical height, in this case here.
As previously, I must solve my backwater curve equation over the range 0 L.
We see that if I am here,
I must always tend to the normal height and everything goes smoothly.
However, in the right case, if I have a j that is initially supercritical, we must have a negative numerator, a positive denominator, so also the dh over dx is negative, so we must have a decreasing curve.
I must normally tend also to the normal height.
The height must reach the curve h equal to hc.
We have seen that it corresponded to a zero denominator, so a tangent that would be vertical.
We would have h prime of x that tends to infinity.
We could naively imagine here after that we would start again with a vertical tangent that we would tend again to my normal height.
This is not at all the case, in fact, the hypotheses that are at the bases of the backwater curve equation are that h must vary in a continuous way, we have small variations of h.
Since we have strong variations of h, the equation is not valid anymore, among other things because we will have an energy dissipation much more important linked to the recirculation of water.
We will thus have a continuous solution here, a discontinuous solution, that we call hydraulic jump and another continuous part so the solution is much harder to build as we will have to calculate separately the two continuous parts and link them by a discontinuous part that will be the hydraulic jump.
We will now see what is a hydraulic jump.
On these two photographs, we have an image of hydraulic jump.
The first one here is an image taken on the field, at the transition of a threshold.
Here we have a arrangement, a stair step.
We have thus a brutal acceleration of the water, a decrease of the water height and here a supercritical regime.
Far after, here at the downstream, we have a subcritical regime and the transition from one to another is done by a brutal variation that we here see with a lot of backwater, of turbulence, a brutal variation of the water height.
If we studied such a transition between a regime supercritical and subcritical in laboratory, we would have something that is represented here.
It is a flow that is visualized with a laser slice.
The blue lines that you see here are the trajectories of micro-particles that are illuminated by the laser and leave a certain trace.
They give an idea of the velocity profile.
We see here the supercritical flow that continues at the base, but we see that we have here a zone of very strong recirculation that will induce a very strong energy dissipation.
We see here the reason why the backwater curve equation ceases to be valid near a jump, simply, besides the energy dissipation at the bottom, that resulted in a regular head loss, will be added a singular head loss due to this strong dissipation due to the water recirculation.
To calculate the characteristics of a jump, we will use again the equation of momentum conservation but over a volume of control.
We will consider a certain volume of water over a length L, assumed relatively small.
We have here a supercritical regime with a velocity u1 and a height h1.
Here, at the exit, I have a height h2 and a velocity u2.
More towards the downstream, normally, we must tend, if there are no other changes, towards the normal height.
We will deal with this brutal variation that occurs over a certain distance L.
Mathematically, we will deal with it as being a discontinuity, as if brutally here, in a given point, we went from a height h1 to h2 and from a velocity u1 to u2.
The question is to know how to position this discontinuity and what are the relations that exist between h2 and h1 and u2 and u1.
This equation is called the hydraulic jump equation.
To obtain the result, we must make a certain number of approximations.
I will suppose that I have a bed little rough and with a slope negligible.
During the momentum conservation, I will neglect the losses due to friction on the floor as well as the driving component of gravity, which will allow me to simplify the equation considerably.
I will also suppose again that the flow is steady, and so that the flow rate per width unit is equal to q.
I suppose that
I have the same unidirectional flow with only one on space bar x.
I suppose also that the jump is stabilized, that it remains at the same position.
It is not always the case, but here will assume that we have a point here that remains still over time.
I will also suppose that on each side of my volume of control,
I have a regime that is fully-developed and that the pressure is hydrostatic on each side. I have here a linear distribution of pressure that is exerted on the walls on my volume of control.
Finally, I suppose that the velocity is uniform through all sections.
To obtain my backwater curve equation, I will use the equations of mass conservation, a continuity equation that tells me that the flow rate is conserved, that u1h1 is equal to u2h2 is equal to the flow rate per unit of width.
The conservation of momentum in steady steate
- I have here removed the term of partial derivative with respect to time - is written as following :
I will project this equation here on the x axis, the term here of momentum flux is simply written, when I use the flow rate, rho q (u2 minus u1).
I will this suppose that the slope is null or small enough to be neglected. 
This term here projected on the x axis is 0.
The pressure term here - I assume that I have a hydrostatic pressure - when I calculate the hydrostatic pressure, it gives the term here with a quadratic variation of the height.
When I write the stress term on the walls of the volume of control,
I have in principle a term here of floor friction that we will neglect by assuming that the length is small and that the energy dissipation over this length is smaller than the one linked to the jump, so this term here, I  will neglect it.
I will find myself left with only the momentum flux term which is equal to the pressure difference and also the mass conservation.
Having 4 variables, u1, h1, u2, h2 and only 2 equations,
I cannot solve entirely my system but I can solve it by fixing conditions.
In general, we fix the conditions at the upstream boundary, we assume that u1 and h1 are known and we are looking for the downstream conditions, so h2 and u2.
As I have 2 equations, 2 unknowns,
I can solve my system.
In this case, we show, for example, when we can neglect the friction, that the previous equation allows to calculate h2.
Generally, we write the result as following : we have h2 over h1 which is a function of the Froude number, this later being calculated at the upstream.
This relation is extremely important, it is called conjugated relation, as it links, it conjugates the arcs of the backwater curve.
We can look at what is equal the conjugated relation ; when we draw the ratio h2 over h1 as a function of the Froude number, we see we have more or less a linear relation with the Froude number.
Another aspect of this calculation is to justify a posteriori the hypothesis that we have done to neglect the friction on the bottom of the channel, a friction of type Manning-Strickler, we have assumed that the turbulence, the backwaters inside the hydraulic jump are such that the dissipation on the wall is negligible.
To justify this hypothesis, we can calculate the head loss by calculating the hydraulic head at point 2 and we see the difference with the hydraulic head at point 1.
When we compute the result, I only put here the final result,
I will let you do the calculation.
We show that the singular head loss is a function of the height h1 and of the Froude number at the upstream.
When we do numerical applications, we will note that this singular head loss is, in a significant way, is much stronger than the regular head loss of Manning-Strickler type.
We still need to know how to conjugate the curves, how to position the hydraulic jump.
I recall the problem :
We will have a supercritical regime with a boundary condition given at the upstream and here we have a subcritical regime with a boundary condition given at the downstream.
The two curves - here we integrate in the decreasing x direction, here we integrate in the increasing x direction and we know, as here this arc curve solution crosses the curve hc, that we must have in this region here a hydraulic jump that links this curve here to this one, in a discontinuous way.
We must have something like this and that brutally jumps to this solution here.
The question is to know how to determine the exact position of the hydraulic jump.
The answer is relatively simple.
We need a little time and practice to understand it well, but it is relatively simple.
We have managed to integrate the equation of the backwater curve, so we have here a numerical solution for the supercritical regime, a numerical solution here for the subcritical regime.
We will calculate the conjugated curve of the upstream supercritical part.
We simply introduce a new curve h index 2 c, c for « conjugate ».
There is here the conjugated equation.
By drawing this conjugated curve of the supercritical part here,
I will have here a discontinuous curve.
It will cross the subcritical solution in a point here and this point will be, by definition, a conjugated height and will also be solution of the equation of the backwater curve for the downstream part.
This point here is looked for, it gives the position of the hydraulic jump.
We have a vertical tangent, so a vertical variation, the height h1, conjugated height, is situated right above, at the downstream abscisse. 
We can reason by calculating either by taking this curve here, by calculating the conjugated height here - we could have done the opposite by taking this curve here and by looking for its conjuate which should have been a curve situated here and intersect the supercritical curve here at point h1.
We have seen here an example of singularity where we could not apply the backwater curve equation by going from a supercritical regime to a subcritical regime.
We have the inverse case with the transition of a subcritical regime to a supercritical.
We observe it every time with a waterfall or a fall of water.
Here, for example, we have a structure called threshold.
Here, water which is flowing at small velocity, so a subcritical regime and at the transition of the threshold, we will have an acceleration of water, a supercritical regime.
All structures with a waterfall are associated with this transition of sub to supercritical.
To calculate the characteristics of this transition between a subcritical to a supercritical regime, we will use on one hand the Bernoulli equation, by assuming that we will have conversation of the head at the upstream of the waterfall, between a point A and a point B.
We have seen in the 2nd module of this chapter that each time we had the passage of an obstacle, at its top we had to have an horizontal tangent of the free surface and the water height had to be equal to the critical height.
Here, at point B, I must have a water height equal to the critical height.
This critical height,
I recall it, is defined as being the height for which the Froude number is equal to 1.
So with Froude number equal to 1,
I obtain the critical height here.
My 3rd equation, as before, the mass conservation or continuity equation that states that I have flow rate conservation here, here and in every sections of my flow.
When I take into consideration these three equations and I report them in the equation of conservation of the hydraulic head between points A and B,
I obtain the following equation where P, it is the height difference here, is called the shovel.
If I am looking to calculate the water height for example, I will have a polynomial equation of the 3rd order as I will have to re-multiply all the terms here by h squared and I thus obtain a polynomial of degree 3 or I can also solve as a function of q,  assuming that I know h.
In that case, it will be a polynomial function of degree for the variable q at the power two thirds.
We can solve this equation of degree 3 or, in general, the hydraulicians are used to do it a little differently and to write the equation under a form slightly different.
For that, we will calculate the hydraulic head at the upstream of the structure.
At the upstream, the total head will be equal to h plus the kinetic energy translated into water height.
I will thus write that the head here at point A is conserved with the head at point B and in this case, by writing this conservation, this head identity, we obtain the flow rate as a function of the head h at point A.
The coefficient CD, if we do the right calculation, is equal to 2 thirds at the power 3 halves, so about 0,5.
In practice, the coefficient CD, the empirical values, are slightly smaller as we will have head losses, energy dissipation linked here to the water recirculations and to the friction at the level of the threshold peak.
We will have in practice CD values that will be a little smaller.
We see that this threshold equation essentially allows to calculate, if we know the total head at the upstream of the structure, to calculate the flow rate or conversely, if I know the flow rate, for example by measuring the water height, to calculate the total head in the immediate upstream of the structure.
We will give the solution to our little quiz. 
In the 1st problem, we had to consider a tank pierced with 3 holes and the question was to know, every hole forming a jet, what was the jet that went the furthest.
The answer is given directly by the Torricelli formula that states that the draining velocity is equal to square root of 2 gh, the velocity that is here will be stronger than the velocity here and so the jet here will go further than the jet here, which we will see right after on a picture.
In the 2nd problem, we must study the motion of a plate that is free to move vertically and so this plate is pierced and we inject air.
It could seem a little paradoxical, we tell ourselves if we inject air, we must force the walls to move away.
It is exactly the opposite that occurs.
It is an effect called « Venturi effect ».
Simply, here, we will, if we recall Bernoulli's equation, at a constant height, we will have pressure + square of the velocity multiplied by rho which is constant.
The pressure must counterbalance the velocity.
If I have a velocity relatively strong,
I will have, inversely, a pressure relatively small.
In the inside here, the pressure will be smaller than in the outside.
I will thus have a motion linked to the pressure difference from the top towards the bottom, and so we will have a narrowing of the wall here towards the bottom.
So proof in video : we only need to take a tank, to pierce it with 3 holes, and what we observe quite easily is that we will have 3 jets and that the jet coming out of the bottom hole will form the jet that goes the furthest.
Here we are at the end of chapter 7 dedicated to applications of Bernoulli's principle.
It is also the end of this course.
We have seen through this chapter a few applications extremely basic but also extremely powerful of conservation theorems, here mainly of the conservation of momentum written as
Bernoulli's principle.
