The proof of this theorem is very instructive, and we will study it.
" Proof "
Here is the function g', the graph of g',
I know that g'(x bar) is smaller than 1 in absolute value, the graph of the function g',
I know that in x bar, g'(x bar) is strictly smaller than 1.
Since the function g' is continuous,
I claim that this function g' remains smaller than one in a neighbourhood of x bar, that is, there exists a positive epsilon and chi positive but strictly smaller than 1, such that for all x between x bar minus epsilon and x bar plus epsilon, g'(x) in absolute value is smaller or equal to chi, which is strictly smaller than 1. 
I can draw the corresponding figure, here is the neighbourhood, here x bar plus epsilon, and this is x bar minus epsilon, in this neighborhood, the function is smaller or equal to chi, which is strictly smaller than 1.
Choose x0 be in this neighborhood, x bar minus epsilon to x bar plus epsilon, here for instance.
We can do the following calculation.
I want to calculate x bar minus x1, why x bar minus x1, because I want to prove that x bar minus x_n+1 is smaller or equal than something strictly smaller than 1 times x bar minus x_n, therefore I start with x1.
Take x bar minus x1, in absolute value, x bar is by definition equal to g(x bar), since it is a fixed point of g, and x1 is equal to g(x0).
Now I use the fundamental theorem of calculus; well this is equal to the integral between x0 and x bar of g'(s) ds.
This is smaller or equal to the length of the interval, in absolute value, x bar minus x0, times the maximum of g'(s), which is the integrand.
First I stated that the absolute value of the integral is smaller than the integral of the absolute value.
I take the integrand g'(s) and search for the maximum over the interval [x bar,x0].
In the figure, here isthe maximum over the interval [x bar,x0].
But on this interval,
I know that the function is smaller or equal to chi; therefore I can state that x bar minus x1 is smaller or equal than x bar minus x0 times chi, which is strictly smaller than 1. 
Lets carry on, this time for x bar minus x2, I start over: x bar is equal to g(x bar), this comes from the definition of a fixed point, x2 is equal to g(x1), which is the integral between x1 and x bar of g'(s) ds taken in absolute value. 
As previously, I bound this quantity, here I have x bar minus x1, and I must take the maximum on the interval [x bar , x1] or [x1 , x bar].
Previously, I said that the error x bar minus x1 was strictly smaller than x bar minus x0, this means I can put x1 here for example in the graph.
I repeat, x bar minus x0 is larger than x bar minus x1.
The maximum, on this interval, of g'(s) on the interval [x bar , x1] is again smaller or equal, so x1 is in this interval and the derivative is smaller than chi, and hence this will be smaller or equal than x bar minus x1 times chi.
And so on, you can observe that this methodology can be recursively repeated, and I get that x bar minus x_n+1 is smaller or equal to x bar minus x_n times chi.
Et donc, comme cette quantité-là,
Well by induction I get that, x bar minus x_n+1 is smaller or equal to x bar minus x0 times chi to the power n+1, since chi is included in (0,1), as n approaches infinity, this quantity approaches 0.
I have therefore proven that the sequence defined by x_n+1 equal to g(x_n) converges, and that this convergence is linear.
This means that the error at step n+1 is strictly smaller than the error at step n.
Now I suggest to come back to, the previous example. 
Lets illustrate this theorem using the previous example. the example from the previous page. 
