Hello. I’m Klaus Schönenberger and I am Solomzi Makohliso.
Did you know that today
2/3 of the world’s population have no access to medical diagnostic imaging despite its importance in health care?
It appears that solutions initially imagined for use in industrialized countries can often not be replicated in low income countries.
This is by no means unique to the domain of medical devices.
There are several other sectors where existing technologies are often ill-adapted to the context such as pharmaceutical products, information and communication technologies, or technologies related to transport and construction.
Water and sanitation technologies are also crucial, bearing in mind that more people have access to a cell phone than to a decent toilet.
And finally, in a world where 800 million people are undernourished, food and agriculture technologies are obviously equally crucial.
Although technology does not provide a silver bullet against poverty, it is a vital enabler of development.
But how can technology innovation bring about change and offer solutions that are truly adapted to the context and needs of the poor?
We invite you to join us for this online course entitled,
Technology Innovation for Sustainable Development.
You will learn how you as an innovator can help solve the important issues that burden those living in poverty.
Through practical examples, we will demonstrate how you can take your initiative from a blank sheet of paper through to large scale deployment of the technology innovation.
This course is not just about coming up with a nice idea or designing a nice prototype, but more importantly about sustainably deploying it at large scale.
It fosters an entrepreneurial approach as you will learn how to design business models that are relevant to address development related challenges.
It encourages co-creating the solution with the key stakeholders involved including the affected populations.
Coming up with solutions that are more affordable and more durable that require less use of consumables and electricity while still being economically viable concerns all of us and not just the people living in poverty.
Whether you are from an industrialized or a developing country, whether you are employed in a company, an NGO, an international organization or a government, whether you are an independent entrepreneur or simply a passionate individual.
This course is for you.
It is free, it is open and we look forward to your participation in bringing about technology innovation for sustainable development.
