So, we've come to the end of this book and it is time to acknowledge the contributions that many have made to the making of the book.
Some of them wittingly, some of them unwittingly.
The key contributions-- of course-- come from Peter Hore, who wrote this little book that we have been using in these lectures.
So Peter Hore is lecturer at Oxford University, and he has written a book that I have bought in vast quantities to redistribute among my students over the last 15 years or so.
He has made a new addition, which you see the cover page, which actually has come out this week this is now in June 2015, in which I am speaking, and therefore, you should be able to get it from your favorite local librarian.
I should say that Peter Hore deserves a great deal of credit for this book.
He came from the world of EPR-- 
Electron paramagnetic resonance-- and learned enough about magnetic resonance of nuclei to pick out the best examples, that I am aware of, of applications of relaxation, of chemical exchange of bio molecules, and all of these different branches of magnetic resonance that are discussed in the book.
So, the next person
I would like to acknowledge is Sami Jannin, he is here in Lausanne, and he has also recorded some videos that are part of the book, in fact the idea that these videos would give you some feeling of more recent developments and modern applications that go beyond the boundaries of Peter Hore's elementary text.
I should also acknowledge the contributions of
Basille Vuichoud, he is a senior graduate student here, almost coming towards his PhD, at the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, and he has not been seen on the videos, but he is responsible for the preparation of the Power Point material that you have seen and also for uploading questions and multiple answers on the website of the book system.
Finally, I should say, that there is an entire team at the
<i>Laboratoire de Résonance 
Magnétique Nucléaire Biomoléculaire</i> who have, one way or another, contributed to making this book possible, and you have seen some of the laboratory in the teaser.
Here in the learning center of the EPFL there are at least two people who have made this possible,
Mathew Goodman has done all of the editing, and I have seen some of it and I know that it is a very difficult task and he is very proficient.
Gwenael Bacquet has over seen the entire effort and coordinated whatever needs to be coordinated.
So the team that makes up the
<i>Laboratoire de Résonance 
Magnétique Nucléaire Biomoléculaire</i> here at the 
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne of course, changes from year to year but I have taken this picture from a few years ago because it shows a nice collection of activities and specialties.
First of all, in the first row you see
Diego Carnevale, who is an expert of solid state NMR and recently moved to the University of Neuchâtel, then behind him Sami Jannin, in the white shirt.
You know him because he contributed to the book.
In front of him-- Pascal Miéville who is now at the staff of EPFL, and did his PhD in our group, then myself.
Next to me, Simone Ulzega in a red shirt, he is now at the Eawag.
Kneeling in front of him is
Roberto Buratto, who is about to obtain his PhD here in Lausanne,
It is not necessary to kneel to get a PhD, but he took some precautions.
Then standing behind him, is Jonas Milani, who you will see, or you may have seen in the teaser where he is showing how the samples are put into the spectrometer.
And in a dark red shirt, there is
Nicola Salvi, who did his PhD in our group some years ago.
Partly involved in new techniques for screening of drugs, and after his PhD went off to 
Harvard Medical School for a year, and he is now in Grenoble at the Institut de Biologie Structurale.
On the second row you see, somewhat in the dark,
Takuya Segawa who finished his PhD at Lausanne, and is now in Zurich, working on electron spin resonance.
Then the tallest figure of all is the one of Veronika Vitzthum who seems like she descended from heaven through this circular window that looks a bit like a halo above her head, and she is now doing MRI in Bern at the Inselspital and also in Solothurn or Soleure--
Northern Switzerland.
Next to her is Marc Caporini who is an American post-doc who after few years in Lausanne returned to Boston and became involved in the American Branch of the Brooker Company and then recently moved into a company that makes bio-molecules.
And finally, Aurelien Bornet who got his PhD a few weeks ago and will stay in our lab a bit longer to do dissolution DNP.
Now there is a smaller sub-team, partly composed of the same people, that is specifically active in the field of dissolution dynamic nuclear polarization.
You see them here in front of a machine that can cool samples to 1.2 Kelvin, now that's very cold, as you may realize and that can irradiate these samples by microwave with about 50 milliwatts.
And you see on the right side, sitting, Sami Jannin, who is rightly proud of this machine because he worked on it for many years and developed it virtually from scratch, with all the whistles and bells, and the pumps and microwave sources and the wave guides, and everything else.
Standing in the middle is 
Basile Vuichoud who is also rightly proud of his achievements, and you can see he is not ashamed of what he did.
And behind him is Jonas Milani who made many interesting contributions to this machine. In particular, a magnetic tunnel that runs just above his head through which we can transfer samples from the polarizer, which you see in this laboratory to another magnet which is in the laboratory behind the wall.
Now to the left of Basile you see Lyndon Emsley who is going to be my successor here at EPFL.
In fact he has just been installed here on June 1st-- about 11 days ago-- as of today, together with two people that joined him on a trip from the École normale supérieure in Lyon.
So I should also acknowledge the fact that I spend most of my time in Paris, and I only come to Lausanne every other week to give lectures and record books.
And in Paris I am in charge of a team which is partly at the
École normale supérieure and partly at the Université Pierre et Marie Curie, and as you can see, we meet in regular intervals, about once a week we have group seminar, and you see some of the members here freezing in the February cold at the foot of the Administration building of the UPMC.
Actually, many of the important people in the group are missing, they are mentioned on the list on the right hand side.
And the whole thing is a very lively environment which stimulates and generates much interest in research, both in methodology, as well as bio-molecular applications and solid state methods.
Now finally I would like to acknowledge-- so to speak-- the rest of the world, and I suggest starting with a statement with a quotation from the Talmud, and I should say that Hebrew is not one of the many languages that I tried to learn at school, and after that, but I had a friend who tried to teach me how to pronounce this and what I remember of this lesson is roughly like this:
Whether my Hebrew friends-- or Hebrew speaking friends-- understand that or not, 
I can give you an English translation, or some attempt to translate this into English:
"<i>From my teachers have I been enlightened,</i>
<i>more from my colleagues, the most I have learned from my Pupils</i>".
Now this statement comes from the Talmud and was brought to my attention by Dr. Ditsa Pines, who is at 
The University of California at Berkeley where I spent a few months as a visiting professor.
Now teachers, there are of course, many I could think of; my PhD adviser Ray Freeman, 
I could think of Peter Hore,
I could think of Richard Ernst, and of Kurt Wuthrich in Zurich, with whom I did many interesting things, or at least things I found interesting.
I can think of Bob Griffin at MIT, who taught me much about DNP and about solid state NMR.
I can think of Rigitsa Vold and Bob Vold at UCSD, with whom I did a post-doc and I learned a great deal about relaxation from them.
There are many teachers, in the narrow sense of the word, but in fact there are many more, of course, there's a vast community of people whom we come across when reading papers and studying brilliant ideas that have been developed over the last 50 years or so.
The colleagues-- living colleagues-- are quite numerous.
I am not only thinking of my immediate environment who are doing chemistry or physics, or biology-- and of course-- we learn a lot from them.
But there are also people who come to meetings and in my field there are so many meetings that you can almost move from meeting to meeting without ever going home.
Some of these meetings are held in Europe.
There is a series that is called Euromar for European Magnetic Resonance which I have been the founding chair of the board of trustees for first six years that this organization was running, and it's now going to be held-- this year-- in July, it will be held in Prague in the Czech Republic, and these meetings, which group about 5-6-700 colleagues, are always an opportunity to learn from them and to be stimulated and to discover new fields.
But most of all, 
I learn from my students; when lecturing, when trying to explain things in a classroom, when trying to advise my PhD students, when revising the drafts of papers they may have produced, when arguing about the best graphical material and how to present their results in the most seductive way.
All of these things are interactive between my students and myself, and I believe that one learns most from students, much more so than from the teachers.
Something that was already realized at the time the Talmud was written.
