Hello! My name is Vincent Lusser,
I work at the Town and Country
Planning Department of the republican state of Geneva in Switzerland.
I'm sure you have heard about Geneva before.
Geneva is very well known around the world for being one of the places where world governance is located.
Just think about the Red Cross, think about the United Nations, the World Trade
Organization, many NGOs.
Geneva is also known for its business location, with many international companies having headquarters in Geneva.
At the same time, Geneva is a very small city.
It likes to think of itself as the smallest of world metropolitan areas.
Looking at how we organize our territory - this is of course a big challenge because our canton is small, the territory is small, and half of it is still very much green, meaning it's agricultural land, vineyards, forests, rivers, places that people really cherish and like, and this is half of our territory.
The challenge for Geneva is really to think: how can we continue to be a very successful town?
How can we continue to be a world leader in terms of international governance?
How can we continue to attract economic growth?
And at the same time, how can we maintain our quality of life, keep our heritage, keep our agriculture, keep all the things that also make Geneva a nice place to live, not just an interesting one to work in?
We've seen how Geneva is being very successful at the moment, with Lausanne and this
Lake Geneva area.
Of course, this means, then, that there is growth of population, there is growth of activity, there is growth of transport.
But now, when we look at the situation on the ground, we see that, in terms of housing, we already had a very tense market, even before the growth went up again.
And in terms of transports, we have a very simple problem.
We have Lake Geneva and the Rhone river; getting from the left bank to the right bank has been a problem for Geneva since the time of Julius Caesar, and especially so, since the right bank of the river is very well connected by rail, but the left bank, the French side, is not very well connected, with subsequently, a lot of car traffic and a lot of traffic jams inside Geneva every day, and every evening, when people leave.
Adding to this, like most cities now around the world, we have a big ambition to become more sustainable in the way we live, in the way we move, in the way we work, in the way we build.
Hw can we do more, and still depend less - typically, depend less on fossil fuels, on which, just to remind you, fifty percent of the energy consumed in Geneva is consumed by buildings.
This is a huge factor, when looking at the sustainable development issues.
So, faced with these challenges, what's the current thinking in Geneva?
Firstly concerning housing, again we want more housing, but we do not want to expand significantly on the green belt.
We still have about three, four percent of the green belt that we can build, and we're doing that.
But the major, let's say, long term solution, will be to construct more dense areas inside the already built up urban areas.
This is of course a very difficult process because you're basically talking about transforming little one-family homes, villas dating back to the 1950s and 1960s, into more urban development areas; and people don't like when you come into their areas and you want to basically tear down their houses and build something new.
The other opportunity we do have is Praille Acacias Vernets, which is a huge area inside Geneva.
Think of the Docklands, think of Lyon Confluence in Lyon.
This is an area which will gradually develop from an industrial area into a new downtown
Geneva, new urban center.
Another challenge here is that this is a quite successful industrial area today, so there too, we don't have a wasteland, we have something which is very much built up and which we need to gradually transform into something more urban.
Looking at transport now, as I said to be the major challenge is to get from the left bank to the right bank of the river and of the lake.
Geneva is now taking a strategic step into urban railways.
That is something many European cities have done; Zurich, Basel have done it in the last decades.
And now Geneva is getting on board.
We are building sixteen kilometers of new track from central
Geneva to France, and this will connect two hundred and thirty kilometers of railway network, connecting basically, the Vaudois
Geneva and French sides of the area together with a rail link.
And this rail link is a major agent of urban development as well.
Because, around the stations, we are building new public spaces, businesses, housing. In Geneva, we call it the project of the century for Geneva.
Geneva wants to reduce its dependence on fossil fuels.
We have quite an innovative project which is already working, which is using the lake water to cool the buildings in the summer, and to heat them in the winter time.
This system already connects the
United Nations area in Geneva, up to the airport, and after a successful test, we want to develop that in other city areas.
We are also testing the territory in Geneva for opportunities to develop a geothermal project.
We know that the underground in
Geneva looks a lot like the underground in Munich, where geothermal projects had been used successfully over the last decades.
But we don't know yet so much about the underground, because we have never explored the underground for oil, unlike other European areas.
We have a lot to explore and to discover in terms of energy.
One point which will certainly interest you in term of a new energy network is that energy always implies a different organization of the territory. I mean, just think of it.
We use the wood, we had to distribute wood.
Today we use oil, we have pipelines, we have a lot of lorries running around with oil products.
Tomorrow, we need to distribute perhaps hot water, or cool water from the lake, and this is creating new networks which have to be included in the urban and town planning, whether add of any buildings.
So in a way, while you're still developing new energy concepts, you need already to include them in the planning of the urban areas that you're developing around them.
To sum it up, I would like to say we have five strategic orientations.
The first is to go a step up in production of housing, by having ten major development projects.
Some of them must still need an agricultural land, the last three to four percent. But most of them will be actually inside the built up areas. Densifying
Geneva, building this Praille
Acacias area into an urban area, is really a priority, and will yield significantly more than the smaller projects that we had across the city so far.
The second strategic orientation is to say while doing that, we want to keep an agricultural area.
Not just for fun and enjoyment, but we think that the food production, also in terms of sustainable development, needs to be staying close to the city. Close to the city or even inside the city in the new city projects. That's something we still need to explore, but it's something which today says to us that it's important to keep that plant and to keep it for the future.
The third big area concerns transports.
I was talking about the cross border rail link, from the left bank to the right bank, which will really not only give us a transport system from across the lake, but it will develop the urban areas around the stations.
That's also one of the key strategic projects.
Right underway it's going to start building next year for the public spaces, and the rail project is already well underway, and due to be opened at the end of 2019.
But this rail link, of course, implies other issues, such as having a cross national transport system, which again will raise issues about ticketing, pricing and how you can travel from one country in one area to the other without actually realizing you're crossing borders.
The fourth point concerns energy.
Of course, developing solar energy using the lake's water to cool or heat the buildings, developing geothermal projects, that's all very important. At the same time we must never forget that fifty percent of the energy in Geneva is used by buildings.
Of course, it's an old city, many buildings are not very up to date, and we must absolutely improve the insulation of these buildings.
For instance, there's a new law in Geneva which says that you have to change your old windows if they are not up to energy levels.
We've made some exceptions, for old buildings in the historic part of town, but all the other buildings will have to basically get up to standards in the next couple of years.
To sum it up, all this would not work if it's not consistent beyond Geneva.
As you know, we're a small city, we are very much connected to Lausanne and to the neighboring
French cities, so, together, we have a Greater Geneva Agglomeration project which won a European prize.
It won a prize because it was a successful attempt to create a common, consistent vision, each in their own country and canton, but still a common vision on how to develop the territory, how to preserve natural areas, how to develop urban strategies for transport, but also how to deal with issues linked to education, health, economy, and also cultural issues.
This gives you, together, a broader view of how Geneva wants to keep these different subjects together very much in a spirit of sustainable development, with its environmental, economic, and social aspects. But, of course, all the most intelligent thinking will never produce any housing, if it doesn't solve the very practical issues on the way.
The practical issues on the way, it's money.
That's one big issue.
Sometimes, it is linked to issues of taxation.
For instance, in Geneva today, people are taxed where they work, not where they live.
Communes that accept new housing actually accept cost factors.
Communes have a tendency to want more activity.
They want offices, they want industry.
For them, having new people coming to live is more of a cost factor.
So we are rethinking the taxation system.
We are also creating a fund, whereby the commune would build will get support from the communes who don't build.
And there's a way to finance especially these equipments like public spaces, ambitious, beautiful public spaces, they are very difficult to finance, and often they hold up the projects when they take place. Then, of course, like any government, the Geneva government has a set of priority investments.
Currently, we have been investing a lot over the last years in Geneva.
We have a new maternity ward, which is the biggest in Switzerland, which was completed this year.
We are expanding other parts of the hospital in Geneva, which is an hospital of regional importance.
We are building our rail network link, which is a major cost factor but a great investment in the future of Geneva.
So then, getting the finances of the transport systems synchronized with the finances of the urban project is quite a challenge, because people want transports to be there, when the first inhabitants move into a built up area.
Second challenge I often see is that, today, we live in a very complex world.
We have seventeen public policies in Geneva, which means we have seventeen areas in which we want to excel.
We don't want to just build housing or transport.
We want to preserve the environment, we want to make social development, we want to invest in education.
And sometimes these public policies
- I wouldn't say they clash, but you have to make choices, and making choices is sometimes a challenge.
You have to work on your project governance.
You have to be sure that all the people from different public administrations come together with a common view in a common set of objectives, and that is very much - I would say it's very much a diplomatic project, as much as a purely urban project.
And then, of course, as we discussed, if you want to densify urban areas, which means to eventually tear down some homes to build new ones, this is a very difficult undertaking with the neighbors.
The term "not in my back yard", you know - the NIMBY syndrome is very much alive worldwide, and it's in Geneva.
The difference in Geneva is that we have a particularly rich system of local democracy, which means you have a lot of opportunities to oppose urban projects, it's very difficult to expropriate people too.
This will add time, and in Geneva
I would say that the projects may actually take more time that they may take in other countries, because of this very much developed local democracy.
Developing dialog processes, with the local authorities, with the communes, with the people who live in these areas, also with the associations who preserve nature, who want more traffic, who want less traffic, who want higher housing or lower housing.
.. This is a complex dialogue project which we have started to organize in a standardized, in a quite developed way.
And this is perhaps something that we don't think about when we think of building towns.
But, eventually, it's a question of saving, perhaps, years of delay, to develop this kind of dialogue with the people.
So, in a way, the experience we have every day is that developing an urban project is perhaps less of a technical challenge.
It's less of a challenge in terms of urban design or architecture, then a challenge in terms of social, political, and institutional dialogue.
I think that's an interesting learning point for us.
Basically, it means that building towns is a political project.
It's something that involves deep discussions inside society, not just money and technical skills, to do something which is well designed.
