Welcome back. This will be the second session of the second module; that's the module that talks about managing urban infrastructure systems. In this second session, we will talk about the stakeholders
- managing the stakeholders.
I think it's very important to show that in addition to managing the infrastructure itself, as we've seen before in terms of maintenance, operations and planning, there are a series of stakeholders, namely users and citizens, operators and investors and, of course, policy makers, political authorities that the urban infrastructure managers have to be attentive to.
They have objectives, they want certain things and, if you do not satisfy them, then it's not enough to just operate your system; you basically operate your system for someone.
Let's first talk about users and citizens.
I would like to talk about users first and then explain the difference with the citizens.
The users are the ones who use the infrastructures - not necessarily the infrastructures, but the services that are provided on the infrastructures. There are two types of users: there are businesses, and the businesses think of a big factory that consumes water or electricity or gas.
They are big users, they are necessarily connected to the infrastructure systems and what they mostly worry about is the price of the infrastructure service, how expensive is the electricity consumed and what is the quality of the water or the quality of the electricity in terms of how many electricity cuts you actually get.
This is what business users of urban infrastructure services are mostly worried about and managers have to satisfy them.
And then, there are individual users or households generally. Households also consume water, they pay for the water services, they consume gas, they consume telecommunications services, they consume electricity.
And what they are worried about is, of course, also the price, or rather the affordability of it compared to their income.
How much, what proportion of their salary do they actually have to pay for gas or electricity or water, that's what users of infrastructure services are worried about.
They are, of course, worried about the quality of the services: is the water polluted? I mean, maybe you can take a shower but you cannot drink it.
You still have to buy bottled water.
It's the quality of the services and, what they are particularly worried about, and that's different from the business users, is the accessibility. If they use a metro station, how far away is it? How accessible is the infrastructure services?
The bus is running, I don't know, every ten minutes or does it come every three hours?
This is a question of accessibility and that's really what the users, the individual users, are concerned with and what the managers of the urban infrastructure services have to pay attention to.
Now, there are the citizens, and the citizens are actually different from the users. In some cases they are similar, all the users are generally citizens, but there are many citizens who do not use this infrastructure.
Think of some rich people who will never take the metro or the tram.
They are concerned as citizens about the quality, the efficiency of the transportation system because, if people use the trams or the metro, the street is less congested and then they can actually advance more rapidly in their cars.
So, as citizens, they are concerned about the infrastructure systems but not necessarily as users.
They are concerned about the efficiency of it, they are concerned about the sustainability of it - think about pollution or things like that -, they're concerned about the resilience of the urban infrastructure systems.
If the metro system breaks down and everybody has to take the car and that's going to last for three days, then everybody is affected and, ultimately, this is about the quality of life in the city.
So, again, managers have to pay attention to that too, they have to pay attention to the users and to the citizens.
And we will come back to the citizens when we talk about the political authorities.
But let's first talk about the investors and the operators.
On the infrastructure side, the physical infrastructure side, we basically talk about operators but basically about investors.
Generally, it's the public authority that has invested, but even there, as a manager, you have to pay attention to the public authority who has invested money in the infrastructure; but it may be a private investor and he wants to see the return on investment, the ROI.
A private investor is particularly worried about the regulations that are behind it.
If you are in the West, what are the regulated rates that you can charge for the usage of the infrastructure?
In return, we have already said that many of these infrastructures are regulated. It's not just a price that you can fix, the price is determined by some political authority and, of course, the investor is mainly concerned about what that regulation actually is. More generally, the investor will be concerned about the relationship he or she has with the political authorities.
This is on the investment side or it could be on the operation side, for example, if a private operator operates a wastewater treatment plant or a waste recycling plant.
These are the kinds of things they would worry about.
On the infrastructure services side, you have operators, private operators, but even public operators.
They are of course worried about the profitability of the services they are offering. You run a tram or you run a bus or a series of buses for that matter is: how much money do you make?
And many of that is regulated again.
What price can you charge for the ticket?
What price can you charge for the water that you are selling?
A regulated price. That regulation directly determines how profitable your operation is.
Another important element is the willingness to pay.
The customers pay. How much are they willing to pay?
How much are they cheating?
If they are cheating, if they are not buying their bus ticket, let's say 5% to 10% of the transport users that can be factored into the cost of the operator, but it's important to know whether the public authorities go after these people or not, for example.   A third element that is important here is: how easy it is to operate.
Can you start a bus business easily or how long does it take for you to get an authorization, to get all the paperwork done? So, those are the things that the operators of the services are mostly concerned about.
And again, the managers of urban infrastructure systems have to look at that.
Now, in terms of policy makers, I will make a distinction between several layers of policy makers.
The most typical layer is, of course, the city government.
You are operating a water system in a city and you may be even owned by the city or you may have a contract with the city.
Now, what is the city worrying about?
The city will be worrying about how much your operations cost, especially if the city has to give you subsidies or it supports you in the investments or on the maintenance of the infrastructure.
A city government will also be worried about the customer satisfaction and the citizen satisfaction.
You, as an operator of an urban infrastructure, know that your political authorities are extremely sensitive to the fact that the citizens may or may not be satisfied, because that will determine whether you get your contract renewed, whether you get a subsidy, how much you get as a subsidy, whether you have penalties in your contract, things like that.
Ultimately, the city government is worried about the attractiveness of the urban infrastructure and the competitiveness of the city, and that's something that managers have to watch out for too.
In some areas, you have actually a metropolitan government or an agglomeration government, we have already seen the jurisdictional problems before, you may not have that.
But, if there's a metropolitan government, there are other things that the metropolitan government is attentive to.
Maybe your contract, as an operator, is with the metropolitan government, not with the city government.
The whole thing will apply to the metropolitan government.
And then you have two other layers of government which may be a regional government in federalist states or it may be directly the national government.
These are important because sometimes, or at least in certain countries, the investments that are made are not directly made by the city, but they are actually made by the regional government or by the national government.
These governments that invest or give subsidies or even make contracts with you are worried about the costs, but ultimately, of course, they're worried about the attractiveness of the metropolitan area, of the competitiveness of the metropolitan area.
So, these are as many things that the managers of urban infrastructures have to look at. My main point here is you don't just manage the infrastructure itself.
You don't just manage the operations, you don't just manage the maintenance and the planning, you also manage the major stakeholders of these infrastructures: the citizens, the users, the operators, if they apply, the investors and the different levels of policy makers.
Now, having seen the different stakeholders, what that means for management, in the next session we are going to come back on the different dimensions of urban infrastructure management and what infrastructure managers have to pay attention to.
We have talked, you remember, about the economic dimensions, the technical dimensions, the social dimensions, the environmental dimensions and the jurisdictional dimension.
We are going to come back to that, stay tuned.
