Let's first of all define the energy sector, because this is a very wide area, the energy sector.
First of all, energy sectors, I will take it as the transformation of natural resource.
So, you transform gas and you produce heat and the heat is the energy.
Or, you use gas or coal, and you produce electricity.
The electricity is the energy part.
The thing before that, it is utilities.
So energy sector, we are talking about electricity and we are also talking about heat, or cooling, also.
The second thing is about the infrastructure.
These infrastructures, related to energy, are long term plants. So, therefore, when you decide to put in place an infrastructure, you are not deciding to put it in for a few months or for a few years.
You are looking at fifty, sixty, seventy year ahead.
So, that means once the infrastructure is in place, well, it is there.
So, therefore, if you want to change things, it is all about adapting. And that takes me to the third point related to energy sector on infrastructure, it is, when you talk about energy sector, it is about production.
The production, obviously, of the heat or the electricity.
It is about distribution, transport and distribution.
And then the third, it is usage.
So, energy sector, I will look at it that way.
So, let's now look at cities.
You have mature cities and you have got developing cities, new cities.
In mature cities, the cities which have started to grow during the industrial revolutions, clearly you already have infrastructure.
And the infrastructure is related to the decision which was taken at that time, was very much related to "Am I going to be independent?" or "What type of system do I need to put in place?" And for example, in
France, in the 1970s, basically, the nuclear was the decision.
So, they decided to produce electricity mainly out of nuclear power plants.
So, if you want to adapt to it, clearly you can adapt to it, but you are not going to change the complete system.
But, you will be able to introduce all the solutions which are biomass solutions for instance, or even gas powered solutions.
But, you are clearly adapting.
You are not starting from scratch.
For developing cities, you've got a clean sheet of paper.
So, it very much depends how you want to build an infrastructure.
But, bear something: in mind the cities are part of a bigger system.
In most countries, it's not up to the cities to decide how the energy structure within the country.
So it's very much regional and sometimes national issues.
So, the thing is about what type of structure we're talking about and the maturity of the cities.
Thus, these other things to bear in mind when you are thinking about implementing an energy solution, energy plant for your city.
And the main challenge is a challenge of governance.
Clearly, a city is part of a system.
So, therefore, if you have a national policy, for example, in
France, you have nuclear, nuclear is the main production, then clearly, the city haven't got anything to say about that.
So, they need to adapt to it.
So, governance is important.
And also, the way, the actors within that governance interact with each other, because the producer will obviously produce the energy.
But and after, it needs to be distributed.
And again, distributing can be in private hands or in public hands.
And then, you've got the commercialization of the energy.
So, these are the type of things that needs to be organized.
And that is the issue when you need to be thinking about it, but the cities most of the time have to adapt to these types of systems.
The other thing is related to public and private.
Clearly the public is a political decision.
Most of the time, as far as energy concerned, it's linked to independence, It needs to make sure that basically, they are autonomous, and usually, at country level, or regional level.
So again, the cities have got very little to do about that.
To give you an example, in
Canada, there is a lot of biomass.
And us, we see more and more.
.. we're involved in project where we are producing electricity out of biomass. And that's just to make sure that you are less dependent on oil. But also, it's very good for the environment.
So, you kill two birds with one stone.
But, that's just an example of the type of things which can be done as far as production and independence.
So, that's the public part.
Now, clearly the private is also important because it can provide a lot of technologies, a lot of ideas.
Usually, private companies they are involved in many countries which means that they are capable of having a breadth of technology. Again, an example: in some parts of the world, we are used to geothermal technology and some other part, we will be involved in solar, in some other part again, on production side, biomass, also gas combined, CHB, all these types technologies are usually adapted to one particular market, and that's cities obviously, in that market.
So, the fact of combining private, the knowledge of private with public in my opinion, you get the both worlds.
You get the new technology up to date, as also private companies are very much involving research and development program, less so in public, and obviously, the public entity. And there are a lot of mechanisms which do exist nowadays to provide the right framework for that interaction between public and private. Such as public-private partnership, PPP, private finance initiative, PFI, all these types of legal frameworks do exist now. So, I think if, in a city, it's possible to investigate this type of a model, clearly, best of both worlds'idea.
I mean that's a great challenge.
Because, clearly, the citizens are getting more involved into all the system, and in particular, with smart technology.
In the old days, you would build an energy plant distributed and more push. And in the other hand of the side, you would have a consumer, citizen which bought the volume of energy and that would be it. Now, with new technology, the consumer is much more aware of what is going on.
And he has the ability to choose, not only in terms of price with different diversity of supplies, but also in terms of usage.
The usage is important because it determines the price and the risk for producers. So, therefore, all the tariffs are usually used or structured to.
.. really, tried to make use the energy in some part of the day or some part of the year.
It is cheaper than others.
So, being aware of the usage is clearly an element for the citizen to reduce his bill and also reduce his Co2 footprint.
And the citizens have much more aware of these things.
So, smart technology is pushing that.
The real challenge is that when you have already existing infrastructure. Then, you have to adapt Infrastructure which have been put in place maybe thirty, forty years ago, which were necessary and still necessary and lack flexibilities in order to give the complete flexibility that the citizen wants nowadays.
So, these are the real challenges.
So, it is all about citizen.
It is in the center but it is much easier to design a system when there isn't existing infrastructure.
And it is more complicated for mature country who have to adapt existing infrastructure, decisions which were taken thirty, forty years ago, which obviously are structuring now the system for the citizen.
One example is clearly that, with the information which is available now on Internet of objects tomorrow, the citizen can see his consumption, can see that tomorrow the washing machine will be able to decide when it starts because it starts when the tariff is the cheapest.
And clearly, we have intelligent meters now which are able to do these things. So, really, we're talking about rupture, really, a change of paradigms as far as the citizen is concerned.
So, that's really the real good things. Another element also, it is now with the smart grids. Citizen can produce energy, they can become producers themselves.
And clearly, when you have an existing infrastructure, it's much trickier to integrate that to an existing infrastructure than to start from scratch.
So, really big changes in the energy sector, in my opinion, into the future.
And the citizen will become.
.. is not longer consumer, is an actor in his consumption and tomorrow is a producer, and in fact, today, he is a producer in some countries.
Resilience is not a new thing, it has happened.
Human being by definition is resilient.
Since it appears on the planet, we are still here on we're growing and we are really a major element of the planet. So, resilience is not a new thing.
But either for cities, two phenomena which affect the resilience is, first of all, the growing urbanization.
More and more of the world population are living in cities.
That means in effect that you have got more people into a city putting pressure on resource and infrastructure.
So, clearly, that is one major impact on the resilience. The second is climate change.
Climate change, as you might have seen, more and more, we are having natural catastrophes.
And these natural catastrophes are happening more often and when they happen, the intensity is that's much higher.
That, combined with the organization, are the real challenges of resilience.
So, when you talk about cities being resilient in twenty years,
I guess there are cities already resilient because you have systems who are resilient.
For example, hospitals usually have backup, with backup generators in case of power cut.
So, these types of things, this technology, do exist.
But, it doesn't mean that you are not at risk.
In 2012, New York was hit by Sandy.
And part of New York, if not most of New York, had a power cut, because the power supply was affected by the natural catastrophe.
But except one part, who had a complete system, smart grid, with capacity to produce a CHB which we run in New York University.
And that, in effect, meant that they still had the electricity.
So, resilience is a matter of putting system, anticipating what can happen in the future.
Taking into consideration the growth of urbanization and the risk of natural catastrophe.
To conclude on these issues of energy sectors and cities, first of all, decide on your governance, that's important.
Secondly, put the citizen in the center.
Design a system which is efficient and also resilient, and resilience is taking care of the future, shocks the urbanization and also natural catastrophes.
And last, but not least, think about the planet, it needs to be sustainable.
