The big challenge to cities in the mobility sector is definitely that their population is growing.
More people are coming to the cities and they have to travel around the city.
Therefore, the mobility network has to adapt itself and has to accommodate these additional people.
This can't be done in private car traffic because roads are already saturated.
More traffic will lead to even more congestion and more problems and also more environmental and social damage through pollution and noise, and more accidents.
Therefore, the solution is really in building more capacity, more lines and more offering in the public transport system, especially in the mass transport aspect of it in the metro lines, in the suburban rail, in trams, and in higher capacity bus lines.
We need this additional capacity to accommodate the additional people and also move current car drivers into the public transport system in order to improve the city life and the quality of life for the citizens.
Now, after the investment in mass transit systems which really will create the backbone for the whole mobility system in the city, we can then add to that combined mobility solutions in walking, cycling, car sharing, other forms of transport which are much cheaper to realize and will offer the last-mile solution for the cities on top of a public transport system.
It is important to realize this as well, but they can't be the only solution.
They can't be alone.
They have to come on top of big infrastructure investments in public transport capacity, which is really the main solution to the challenge of the city in mobility.
The realization of integrated mobility system in a city poses, of course, how to bring together all these different actors and work them together efficiently, and this is a very complex problem because there are a lot of actors coming into the field of mobility.
The traditional operators of different modes of transport, the planning side, of course, from the city, and the new operators from the combined mobility solutions: bike sharing, car sharing, and other associations as well that are important to be integrated.
Therefore, how to work together efficiently is really the challenge that poses, and I am convinced that even the best city planning department can't do everything by itself, but has to delegate some competence and some, even, freedom of management to the different players and treat them as partners, and work together with them as partners.
Of course, there needs to be some formal arrangement in the form of a contract that regulates the main aspects, financing aspects and performance aspects that then can be followed on and measured concerning if these different actors make a good job or not.
An important part in that, that I am convinced, is that these contracts, objectives and arrangements have to be made public.
They have to be fully transparent to the citizens, and to the users, to the passengers of public transport in order for them to follow up what your goals are and if the different actors make a correct job in realizing this and if this is not the case, there have to be consequences, financial consequences in the form of incentives and penalties and even if everything goes wrong and no corrective action is efficient, they have to be changed, and I think it is important even for us as operators, public transport operators, to know that we can be replaced if we don't do a good job, but we have to have a certain freedom in achieving our goals, and we have to know, of course, our goals for several years ahead in order to be prepared and to plan ahead and be able to realize them well.
In order to realize all these important objectives and goals for an improved and more efficient public transport network, we need, of course, everybody to work together towards that goal.
People have to realize that the priority should be public transport as a backbone, as a base for the success of their city, economically, socially, and environmentally, meaning at the end, also for the quality of life in the city.
So, city managers, city politicians, but also other levels of government on a regional, national level, have really to come together and define together public transport as a priority for the success and for the future of their city and if that is done, then the conditions can be set accordingly, and the laws can be put right in order to allow for public transport to be developed and to be financed and to be successful in the future.
I believe that this is happening right now and people are coming together and are seeing that the priority should be on public transport development in order to become a successful city.
