Welcome everybody.
This online course is on defining smart specialization strategy.
And we will not only look into it theoretically, and look at the academic foundations of the concept, but we will keep ourselves busy with how it works in the real world.
Therefore, also it's only in week three that we really look into the details of the process of defining the strategy it is helpful to have a real world example right from the beginning.
And therefore, we have a first case study today.
Of course, this case study will not look that much into how a region defines the smart specialization strategy over the strategy itself.
Looks like we are particularly interested in how the strategy might help a region to develop, what are the advantages if a region follows the concept of smart specialization, and how that concept fits in with other economic policies in a region.
We are very glad that Jean Severijns agreed to discuss this with us and help us to provide this first case study of the course.
Jean is a project manager of internationalization of the province of Limburg, in the Netherlands.
He's also a long time expert on smart specialization within his province, but also in the broader context of the Netherlands, as well as the EU.
And actually, Jean applied the concept of smart specialization for a much longer time than the notation of smart specialization actually exists.
But, let's listen to himself about that.
We are most grateful to Jean for his time, his expert knowledge and that he shares his vast experience with us.
Jean glad you're here today, it's nice to have you talking about smart specialization and what you do in your province.
Maybe you can quickly tell us what is your role in your province?
I work for the province of
Limburg in the Netherlands.
I'm the project manager for the internationalization which means I'm responsible for the international economic relations of the province, I'm involved in the smart specialization strategy discussion on the provincial level, and on the European level.
I'm a member of the Mirror group for smart specialization and I was a member of the stakeholders group in the southern part of the Netherlands for smart specialization, because smart specialization in the Netherlands, they divided the Netherlands into four geographical areas. The province of Limburg belongs to the southern part of the Netherlands, they have their own smart specialization.
Together the province of Limburg and our neighboring provinces
Noord Brabant and Zeeland are members of that preparation group for stakeholders.
So you're very experienced already with smart specialization although the concept is not that old yet.
The basic concept of the smart specialization started more or less twenty years ago, DG REGIO.
And the province of Limburg was lucky to produce the first, what was called at that time a regional technology plan, you can see it here.
It's a collector's item, I think.
It has long history but since
2014, smart specialization is the core content of the operational plans, by the European commission to invite and to challenge regions to think about their real strengths.
That was called smart specialization.
Yeah, very good. So you get a kind of a concept to something you were already doing beforehand.
-Yes.
-Yeah. Let's have a look in what is your smart specialization strategy in the south of the Netherlands.
The southern part of the Netherlands has chosen to start thinking, and we had more than fifty meetings with all the stakeholders, so regions, companies, cities consultants, ministry, and a lot of other stakeholders to dig deep into our real strength.
And we came up with the strategy that consists of three main issues where we think in the southern part of the Netherlands where our real strength is.
That's high tech systems, the chemicals and advanced materials and agrofood,and waterculture.
These are the three themes that we think can really play an important role on a world level and is a layer of four other issues and themes that have a kind of national importance.
Like, maintenance, and medical technology, and things like that.
These are our, let's say, seven core choices we made on the geographical level, the southern part of the Netherlands that was a kind of negotiation, because a lot of regions said
"But we are strong in design" or "We are strong in water" it was a very intensive process, that's also meant to be a strong intensive process.
And two things are important.
First of all, the crossovers between our choices are very challenging issues, because the innovation and technology, opportunities, you often find them between different issues.
And between different industries?
Between different industries, the different approaches. Yes.
And a second important issue is that we try to give the contribution to, what is called societal challenges.
And the societal challenges are defined on the European level with all member states, and we think it's important that we, all the actions, we implement make a contribution to improve to solve the societal challenges.
Now we are very deep into the discussion why smart specialization strategy ?
We saw, you presented the focus areas, the choices you've made, and the concept is actually about doing choices, but we call in the course later on priority areas that you have to choose.
But, again, why did you choose smart specialization as a concept for your strategy, how is it different from other kind of policies like the innovation policy the cluster policy, or the classic industrial policy?
Yeah, good question.
I think, because we know that in order to survive you have to choose.
Because 99.99% of all the know-how assets are outside your own organization whether your organization is, as mine multi-national or regional, authority or whatever.
And we realized that even before the policy was called smart specialization because we have a mono-economic structure in our region, in Limburg with coal mines, and also in our neighboring region there's a very strong automotive, we closed our coal mines and the automotive industry in Noord Brabant, the region went bankrupt in the 90's and then all stakeholders led by politicians thought:
"We have to make new choices."
And you cannot make choices everyday.
So, if you make a choice now, and you ask money for it and support from all your stakeholders in your region you have to be sure that your choice is good for the next period, for the next decade, so we already were on that track and in addition the Netherlands, and that's not the same in all
European regions, is a consensus based society.
So a cooperation with each other is more or less in our genes so from that process, that lasts decades, the start of small specializations strategy that originally came from Brussels fit exactly in our process.
So we did not make fundamental choices in our process but smart specialization activities were additional and fit perfect in things that we already did.
Priority choosing. So, focus on focus.
So, what I understood correctly, there are two particular things you mentioned, one is that you have to know yourself really know your strengths and build on them you have to do research into that, and agree on that.
-Yes.
-And on the other hand to make choices and focus your resources on the topics you can cope with, not on everything at the same time.
And that makes it different from horizontal policies.
You have to dig deep, and you have to base on evidence, evidence based, and BAK Basel economics for instance, helped us with these types of studies to know, really, what type of companies, what is your innovative potential, that when you start negotiating on your choices to focus on, you need content, you need evidence based elements, otherwise your choices are based on more or less nothing and we are very strong in our consensus based society, as I said.
To mobilizer people, building networks, putting people together to think about what is really important for us now and those choices have to be relevant for the future too, of course.
Yeah. You mentioned evidence just a second ago now do we have some evidence of what smart specialization strategy or concept following it did for the province?
Did you have success?
As you do it already for twenty years more or less.
-Yes.
-What are the successes of it?
The success is that apart from  projects, of course
I can list a long number of projects that's probably not what you are referring to but we managed to bring partners together in investment strategy so the university at the province of Limburg and multinationals are shareholders in what we call clusters because, perhaps in between you have a smart specialization strategy for the southern part of the Netherlands part of the operational program, and at the same time of course we have also based on that priorities in our own sub-region a part of the south part of the Netherlands.
So, in our region, province, we have four, what we call campuses, on agrofood, on chemicals and advanced materials on health and life science, and on smart services.
And those who made an agreement with the university they connect all the campuses, so they decide our policy to invest also with students, on every campus so they start teaching on every of the four campuses, to give the students the opportunity to link the academic world and the day-to-day practical business world.
And as I said,  we made a strategy as a province we invest together with stakeholders for the next ten years, and we put millions and millions of euros into our choices, so we really choose and for the next ten years we will keep that structure, and we'll keep those choices and, step-by-step everyone knows that.
So everybody, small, medium size enterprise and others national, international, now try to join the bandwagon.
So we know the choices that we have, based on our smart specialization strategy, and I will say it's a success, you can see it in the figures, perhaps we can discuss that later, in another setting.
But in that way, you bring together the entrepreneurial resources activities from the companies on one side, and the academia and the industry, the production on the other side, and the government is kind of facilitating the whole process.
-That's perfect.
-You started in the past but now we see, the past, it was more of a major role of the regional government, now we share that role in the strategy building, the priority setting and the implementation together with universities so the academic world, the science, and the business community.
Great. If you broadened it a little bit about the success smart specialization strategy, the southern part of the Netherlands is quite successful throughout the region.
Your personal feeling, what did smart specialization contribute to that success, or did it contribute?
It absolutely contributed, but perhaps also in another way that was not expected before and that's the cooperation in your own member state.
There's a lot of effort to cooperate internationally and I'm responsible for international relations so I loved it.
But what you also see is to cooperate with your neighbors.
And that's caused mainly by smart specialization strategy.
Now we cooperate more with our neighboring regions in Noord Brabant for Limburg, and the Zeeland because there is smart specialization strategy.
And there is the ERDF, money from the European commission and now we start thinking:
"Well, we choose for the bio-based economy." for instance, as a cross-over in our priorities, so now we investigate in depth what are these opportunities with our neighbors and perhaps we wouldn't have done that so in depth without the smart specialization strategy, just as an example.
And our relation with the national ministry also it's not changed, but it's given extra dimension, because in smart specialization is co-financed by the national government and Europe, we have additional relation in those types of discussions with our national government.
So, there's also impact and also the relation to our neighbors in
Belgium and Germany, because we are a border region.
And ten percent of our budget we can use for cross-border activities.
Just as an example.
-Okay, so big impact.
-Yes it has a big impact. Yes.
Now, the Netherlands and, as you said also a cultural thing is a very it seems suiting setting for such a strategy and that's probably the reason why you already do that for about twenty years and you pointed out, so the concept was not there at that point.
What do you think for other regions?
What can other regions take from it?
Is it something that needs the special setting, or can other regions with other cultural and economic background also advance by smart specialization?
I think you can make smart specialization strategy for all regions because it is not necessary to have a high-tech or high-innovative or or high research potential in order to make a smart specialization.
You can also do it for tourism or for whatever.
It's important that you reel in evidence based, good insight into the strength of your region, and try to organize commitment and consensus to make choices and organize consensus on your choices, but you have to prove that you make a proper process, that you involved all the relevant stakeholders in your choice, so focus on focus define priorities, and make sure that all your relevant stakeholders in your region follow that choice.
Jean, thank you very much for your time, it was most interesting for us and it will help to continue that discussion.
Okay, thank you for the invitation.
