First, according to the ranking on
Regional Institution of Quality published by the European Commission, the Basque Country stands out positively and ranks first among all Spanish regions.
It's important, not only having the competence to apply policies, but the capability to make good use of these competencies.
Third, noting where almost all analyst and government were against active initial policies, the Basque government developed plans and programs with clear prioritisations.
In some of these programs, for instance, the one launched to and programs with clear prioritisations.
In some of these programs, for instance, the one launched to bolster the economy, the Basque
Country was a real pioneer in the world.
In some of the programs for instance in the support for the STI infrastructure, Basque policies differ totally from other Spanish regions.
In some of the programs for instance in the support for the STI infrastructure, Basque policies differ totally from other Spanish regions.
Not only the amount of resources but also in their composition.
Unlike other Spanish regions where
STI policies were read but the
Department of Education, in the
Basque Country the STI policies was written by the Industry
Department with a philosophy of public private partnership.
Finally, Basque Provincial Councils have much more power than the
Spanish regions.
For instance, taxes collected by provincial councils are not by the Basque government and even if the Basque government holds the main competence and industrial and R&D policies.
Provincial councils have their own programs and are launching their
S3 strategies even more.
Capital city councils and counties such as Bilbao Arrigorriaga are working on S3 principles
In terms of performance the
Basque Country's one of the most comprehensive regions, not only in Spain but also in Europe.
So we can see in this graph, GDP per capita has been constantly rising, reaching levels well above European averages and even the average in
Germany which is one of the most competitive countries in Europe.
This is probably due to the secure structure of the Basque country in which manufacturing has a large weight in the economy.
This work has been decreasing since around 30% in the year 2000 to around 20% in the year 2015 but still it concentrates a large part of what is produced in the Basque Country. but still it concentrates a large part of what is produced in the Basque Country.
It's also due to the outward orientation of the economy because around 35% of what is produced in the
Basque Country is exported elsewhere in the world and about 30% is sold to other regions in Spain.
But one of the reasons as well is the innovation in the Basque Country.
In this other graph we can see that the expenditure on R&D with respect to GDP has also been growing systematically despite the crisis reaching levels which are about 2% of GDP, which is about the average in Europe, not as much as what happens in Germany for instance but it is still constitutes a large proportion of the GDP.
That has made the Basque Country to be considered a strong innovator in
Europe according to the
Regional Innovation Scoreboard and also a Region of Excellence because instead of what happens in
Spain which is a moderate innovator the Basque Country is a strong innovator, the only region in Spain according to the last Regional Innovation Scoreboard.
That does not mean that the crisis has not had its toll on the economy and in society in the Basque Country. as illustrated by this other graph in which we can see the unemployment rate and how it has been growing not as much as it's been happening in Spain since the beginning of the crisis but from the lowest rate of 3.3% in the year 2007 to around 16% in the year 2014.
Much higher than the level seen in Europe.
Also something to be considered is what we have observed and we have called the Innovation Paradox because we observed in the past that despite the high levels of input in terms of innovation must measure for instance by the percentage of
R&D that expenditure  was attributed to GDP and the good outcomes in terms of GDP per capita.
The outcomes in terms of innovation measured for instance with patents and per capita were not so high.
That might be because the outcomes of innovation have not been measured correctly.
We all know that patents might not be a good measure for innovation but it might be pointing out to something that is in the economy.
The Basque RIS3 is the science, technology and innovation plan 2020.
This strategy was developed in 2 phases.
The first phase was developed in 2013 and delivered by the Economic
Development and Competitiveness
Department of the Basque Government with the support of Orkestra, the
Basque Institute of Competitiveness.
In this period it was clear that the side of developing and leaving a strategy more than a plan and we developed an analysis to identify the main vertical priorities for the Basque Economy.
For this we take into account 3 criteria.
The business capabilities in the territory, the scientific and technological capabilities and also the market and the social needs and the result was  the identification of 3 main priorities which were advanced manufacturing, energy and BioScience health.
After the development of these analyses our dialogue with other departments in the government started and in this dialogue, it was clear that it was critical for the involvement and collaboration of other departments of the government to the development of this strategy.
And that's why the leadership in the second phase of the development of this strategy was assumed by the
Presidency of the Basque Government.
So during 2014, the Presidency of the Basque Country with the support of DEUSTO started developing a plan, a plan for the development of the RIS3 strategy in the
Basque Country.
For that the Basque Science,
Technology and Innovation Council created an operational team in which the different departments of the
Basque Country with other institutions were developing this plan.
Regarding the participation of the
Quadruple Helix on the development of the plan, the process was not widely open but there were several mechanisms to consult and incorporate the the influence of the  Triple Helix agents, mainly firms, knowledge institutions and also all the governmental entities.
So during this open process, all the opportunity niches were identified and were incorporated into the strategy which were food, urban habitats ecosystems and cultural and creative industries
So in general, there is a recognition, that the strategy, the RIS3 strategy of the Basque Country has made sense, this is our continuation of previous strategies and also there is a good balance amongst the short term and long term needs and one of the critical issues to underline is that even in this second period the focus was in developing a plan, this was really at the end a living plan because what was published at the end of 2014 was changed in 2015 with a new annex taking into account the changes and new ideas that come from the implementation phases in 2015.
So this is really a living strategy and now it's in the implementation phase which is being a very participatory process for the identification of focuses of the priorities in the Basque Country.
One of the most interesting thing for me about the Basque RIS3 story is the changes that it has provoked in regional government as we've moved from the planning phase or design phase of the RIS3 through to the implementation phase.
The RIS3 itself took the shape of the 2020 Science, Technology and
Innovation plan which was approved at the end of 2014 and after that we moved into a process more of implementation.
The RIS3 plan itself setup what can be referred to as the Basque RIS3 governance house which identified a series of institutions and processes or organs and processes that were designed to help guide the implementation of the RIS3.
Within this I think we can point to 2 really significant types of changes in terms of the governance.
One in terms of governance, within government and also in terms of governance beyond government.
Thinking first of all in terms of governance within government, the RIS3 governance house or the design of the government structure of the RIS3 set up a couple of new really important, quite important institutions.
On the one hand there was a new advisory group which was designed initially to advise the Basque Science,
Technology and Innovation Council.
However in practice it's really been advising the president and the council of ministers directly.
What was interesting about this group was that is was set up with an explicit aim to bring people from a range of different disciplines and a range of different places, and not the usual suspects, kind of fresh ideas.
People who could take a look at what was happening from the outside and provide insight and ideas
And it's really, I think, worked quite well in terms of providing a sounding board for the council of ministers and the President in terms of the top leadership of the strategy.
The other key development in terms of within government was the establishment of an interdepartmental committee.
This was a relatively new arrangement because when the RIS3 was initially started working on the design phase.
It was very much the domain of one department, the competitiveness department.
However that changed to become under control of the presidency department and therefore there was acknowledged the need to look at the different departments that were involved in, that could play a role in RIS3.
So an interdepartmental committee was created that brought together all of the relevant departments.
Competitiveness, education, health, environment, finance etc.
This committee has been really quite important because it brings together the vice ministers and the heads of departments from within those departments who are working day to day on policy issues.
So it's been an important step in improving the policy coordination as the RIS3 has started to be implemented and we see departments
So it's been an important step in improving the policy coordination as the RIS3 has started to be implemented and we see departments that previously weren't used to working together are now working together over certain issues and certain aspects of policy instruments.
So within government we see 2 really important differences in governance that has been provoked by the RIS3 process.
But looking beyond government we can also see important changes.
At the bottom of the governance house diagram you can see this notion of live processes for the engagement of different actors and this is the idea that from the ground, the RIS3 governance needs to involve, not just government but also business, clusters, universities and to lesser extent, I think in the
Basque Case Civil Society.
One of the aspects that perhaps hasn't been integrated yet to such a great extent.
The way this has been operationalised in the implementation has been through the creation of spaces which is setup as steering groups.
One steering groups of each of the
3 priorities and one steering group for each of the 4 opportunity niches
These steering groups bring together the key players that are involved in the business, in the technology, in the research and in government in different departments within each of those priorities and they're designed in the sense to support the entrepreneur or the discovery process in the sense that the priorities themselves  can be refined and can evolve over time with the input for these different agents.
So we can start to see a change in the governance from below starting as well.
These groups work to certain guidelines that were established by the interdepartmental committee so there are rules of the game in terms of which actors are involved in terms of the types of activities and the types of decisions that the steering groups are working on and however there is also a lot of flexibility they're designed to be flexible so that each priority can take its own path and that's very important because advanced manufacturing, for example, with all its different sub-sectors and technologies is quite a different priority to energy and also the opportunity niches which were in a far earlier stage of development again require something slightly different in terms of the process to more established priorities.
So that flexibility again has been quite an important aspect to this governance from below.
Overall if we look at this group of changes both within and beyond government in terms of governance
I think we can summarise them in terms of a move towards a more distributed leadership when it comes to territorial strategy.
We've moved in a sense from a situation where leadership was very much from government and also very much from within one department in government towards a situation where different departments of government are taking responsibility for different aspects of the strategy and where we're starting to distribute leadership with the strategy also amongst businesses, clusters, research of the strategy and where we're starting to distribute leadership with the strategy also amongst businesses, clusters, research institutions etc that engage from the bottom up.
The Basque energy industry is made up of around 350 companies with a very highly specialised focus in energy sector activities.
The overall turnover of the sector counts to over €47 billion.
Nearly €15 billion sourced locally and provides over 21 000 jobs in the Basque Country.
This industry is backed by a very robust technological and innovation infrastructure made up of technology call centres, universities and the R&D units of the companies that have a very consolidated presence in the different energy fields.
The Basque energy companies invest every year around €400 million in research and development of which 55% is spent within the Basque Country.
The choice of energy is one of the priorities of the regional innovation as marked as specialisation strategy of the
Basque Country of the RIS3 of the Basque government.
It's in fact based of the key role the energy sector is playing in the
Basque economy.
For emphasizing this, the competitive advantage of this priority as specific a strategy on technological and industrial development called EnergiBasque have been setup with the ambitious vision of turning the Basque Country an international knowledge poll and the reference regarding the industrial and technological development of specific energy technologies.
It's clear that Smart Specialisation strategies implies identifying the characteristics of a specific territory and exclusive assets of each region and putting in place mechanisms to enhance them.
The definition of a Smart
Specialisation strategy implies identifying the characteristics of the specific assets of each region and putting in place the right mechanisms to enhance them.
But it is also very important to bring together all the participants and stake holders around the shared vision of this strategy that can make RIS3 a territorial strategy rather that just a government strategy.
For building this shared vision, the Basque government has created a public private collaborative process and space, the so called,  steering groups for each RIS3 priority and the Basque government has delegated in the Basque energy cluster the leading role in the energy priority.
The Basque Energy Cluster is an industry driven cluster.
It was created in 1997 as a non-profit organisation and integrates presently around
180 companies, members, including leading international companies, highly competitive SME's but also research and technology centres, universities and the public bodies involved in the energy and technology developments.
The organisers of priorities of those
7 market areas and 2 key enabling technologies has allowed to identify synergies between them showing the possibility of aligning efforts and resources and combining technological solutions from those several sectors.
As a consequence, we are aiming to convert this new approach, this 3 new value change into a real global value change aiming at opening opportunities and complementary resources for our companies, not only at regional level but also globally.
So this is the reason why we are being very active in different
European initiatives such as the
Vanguard Initiative network where the Basque Country is co-leading, together with Scotland, the pilot action called advance manufacturing for energy related applications in harsh environments and we are also participating in some different platforms and networks, Europe-wide.
The Basque Energy Cluster is also leading European strategy cluster partnerships on the Smart
Specialisation investment platforms such as the offshore energy and smart grids areas in which we are closely collaborating with the commissions Smart Specialisation platform on energy.
All this interregional cooperation efforts are aimed to leave an outward looking dimension to our regional innovation as Smart
Specialisation strategy.
So 4 years ago, we started with a specialisation strategy working together with Orkestra, trying to find the main strategic areas in the Basque Country.
Considering our knowledge, specialities and all together with the industry strength.
Quantifying 3 main areas which are advanced manufacturing, related to our capabilities here.
For instance, aeronautics, train industry, at the same time, automation and of course, machine tooling.
The other area is energy focused on renewable energies and on batteries, on our capabilities there and the third one is biosciences but mainly focused on health.
Not only with pharma but with medical devices at the same time.
Together with the 3 main areas, we're working with some niches.
For instance, the food industry where we have capabilities from the knowledge point of view but also strong capabilities from the industry point of view.
Then when we're finished with the strategy definition, we started trying to implement the strategy and implementation has gone with some pilot groups on each of the areas.
And at the same time, with the capabilities and all the work in the pilot groups, we have been working in Europe, of course, with some other regions.
For instance, with the Vanguard
Initiative, we are some of the founders of the Vanguard Initiative and we are leading, together with
Scotland, a project with manufacturing for the energy industry, renewable energy industry for harsh environments.
So this is one of our work in Europe.
The other one, for instance, is with KIC Initiatives.
One in advanced manufacturing and the other one in the food industry.
The food industry has just been approved last month so we are trying to work there and, of course, our companies, our research centres and universities are working very hard in the Horizon 2020 strategy.
So this is the main areas now that we are working and we hope that the next step will be trying to analyse what we are doing and trying to focus on the evaluation, the monitoring of all the strategies and all the pilot groups, resources and so on.
Monitoring and evaluation has always been one of the pending issues in regional innovation policy in the Basque Country.
This is one of the weaknesses that have been highlighted by the peer reviews that have been conducted in the last year for some probably by the OECD in 2011 and by the experienced Smart
Specialisation strategy,
Kevin Morgan in 2013.
Kevin Morgan even highlighted that the government didn't invest much in monitoring and evaluation.
However, I have to say, that there has always been an evaluation exercise put in place in the Basque Country.
Since then, monitoring and evaluation has improved quite a lot and what is regarded as Smart
Specialisation strategies, a more holistic framework has been designed around what is the
STI plan 2020 which is an explicit document that reflects the
Smart Specialisation strategy in the Basque Country.
Innobasque, which is the real innovation agency here is in charge of putting in place this monitoring and evaluation system and the system has been built around 3 main axes.
The first point is about monitoring the strategic objectives of the strategy which is mainly conducted by a set of indicators or a scoreboard and is done every year.
The second axes is about monitoring and evaluating the contribution of the Basque Science, Technology and Innovation network which are the main scientific and technology actors within the Basque system and innovation policy instruments to this strategy.
How do we measure or how do we evaluate this contribution is a very, very complex issue and it has been taken separately.
First of all with regards to the
Basque STI Network, only has been a process in which it is has been set a scoreboard for every specific type of actor according to their mission and they are going to be monitoring and evaluating according to that scoreboard that also sets goals.
With regards to instruments, it has also been put in place a process for gathering data about the impacts of specific industries, especially on firms and also on other (INAUDIBLE) sectors and finally, the third line of action is about how to monitor and evaluate the whole system and it's based on a comparative assessment of the system.
This assessment is built by different exercises and for example like I mentioned that one of the exercises that is put in place is for example about evaluating or calculating the impact of innovation expenditure on the
Basque productivity.
But another very different exercise with a different methodology is also been implemented and tries to measure the perception of the
Basque actors about the real innovation system.
Finally and with regards to the thematic priorities, it has also been a process of design of a tailored monitoring system for each of the priorities and currently for some poll there has been conversations about how to monitor their activity and the projects that are coming out from each of the priorities for example for the advanced manufacturing priority.
Finally, I think it's also important to highlight that despite all the advancements, there are some pending issues in the Basque region for monitoring and evaluation.
First of all, it's important to raise the awareness for monitoring and evaluation amongst all the actors and this also implies moving from an accountability approach to a more learning approach of the evaluation and try to embetter all the resource of these evaluation exercises into the policy making process.
In addition, I think one of the key challenges here is moving on also from individual instrument evaluation to a policy mix approach in which we can evaluate the interactions on complementary between different or amongst different instruments.
And finally, I think we should also move from a traditional governance of the evaluation process towards a more innovative one and that means also a (INAUDIBLE) of the entrepreneurial process into the evaluation.
That means sharing the evaluation, or sharing the ownership of the evaluation with all the actors that participates in this entrepreneurial discovery process.
