Forest Based Bioeconomy is the specialisation of the highest priority in Värmland.
The vision is that we show the way with bio-based invasions from the forest to a fossil free and sustainable society.
We want to make more of our long fibre raw material from the forest and also increase the value added from
 the side streams in the industry.
The Forest Based Bioeconomy, I think we have great challenges and opportunities for this.
We have really good raw material, we have the infrastructure, we have our mills, we have the pulp mills, the paper mills but also the saw mills.
We also have a lot of waste streams from these that are not totally utilised today, you can still do more things and maybe create higher value and products from these so we can increase what we can use from the
Forest Based Economy even further.
One example is that maybe we can use the side streams from our paper mills to actually make a bio-based plastic that you can incorporate into your packaging material and by those means reduce the carbon dioxide of the package. 
Forest Based Bioeconomy for me is how we can use the forest to mitigate the climate change.
The forest is a fantastic sustainable material and the fact is that everything you can do from oil, you can actually also do from the forest so you can produce all kinds of materials and fuels and products from the wood and that is how we are going to enter the future and how we can create the fossil free society and I feel very happy that we are actually in the front line in this transformation.
In Värmland, we have a lot of important assets actually enabling us to be a front runner in the
Forest Based Bioeconomy.
First of all, of course, we have the forest.
Värmland is covered 70% by forest and we have been using wood in the industry for hundreds of years.
The development over the past century has led to that we in
Värmland today has a vibrant business ecosystem related to the forest industry. 
We also have research related to the industry and an infrastructure consisting of innovation platforms and test beds.
No where else in the world is there so much competence and experience gathered around pulp and paper technology and this ecosystem actually contains all the assets that are needed to create the
Forest Based Bioeconomy.
Pro2BE was formed very timely by outside and internal forces.
We had the small specialisation process driven by Region Värmland.
We also had processes within universities to develop strong and excellent research groups.
We saw, and the outside forces also saw how this could come together in the research group. 
Pro2BE which could help to advance the Forest Based Bioeconomy.
The uniqueness comes from our history where we have together developed some specialties which are very competitive and useful for a forest based industry but it also stems from the fact that together, we for instance, 
Region Värmland, the Cluster
Organisation Paper Province and internally we have developed a way to put out the research in to use in society nowadays. 
Mostly we deal with renewable materials and we put them into used products, we also find ways to handle these renewable materials in processes but it's not only that, many of our researchers consider systems and systemic effects on how to utilise the materials in a more energy wise manner or a materials conserving manner also considering carbon dioxide outlet, to minimize that as means to consider the global challenges.
We also have researchers that considers food spoilage, which is, of course, one of the very important questions for humankind and, in addition, this influences our undergraduate education as well and of course we don't only educate, for instance, PHD students and researchers, we also have undergraduate education and we think that our students bring this with them when they find their future employers.
I represent a research group called
Packaging for Sustainable Development that is a part of Pro2BE at
Karlstads university and we want to contribute with knowledge about how packaging can prevent food from being wasted and therefore reduce the total environmental impact in the food supply chain.
What we have done is to investigate how packaging influences consumer behavior and especially when developing functions that help the consumer to waste less.
If we only use milk for coffee, 
3 deciliter milk is perhaps enough and not buy one liter of milk. and another function could be that the packaging is resealable so that the food lasts for a longer time.
In our region, Värmland, we have several large companies that are producing paper and paper board that is used for packaging so we have done projects together with some of these like BillerudKorsnäs and today we are also collaborating in a national project with companies from the entire supply chain to really try to find new innovative solutions for packaging that reduces food waste.
That's a really tall order to make a transition from a fossil base to a bio based economy and here at our research centre, which is called Centre for Regional
Studies, CRS at Karlstad University, we are involved in a number of different projects in relation to a
Forestry Based Bioeconomy.
To make this transition, we need to generate new knowledge and new knowledge needs to be generated in new ways.
There is no single discipline in the university that can contribute the the knowledge needed. 
We need to collaborate with the different actors.
We need to cross-disciplinary research.
We need transdisciplinary research.
Which means that we involve non academic actors in the research and that can be public organizations, firms, cluster organizations, civil society and civil society can be NGOs of different types but also individuals such as patients, clients, the local population.
What we need is a regional innovation system that moves from Triple Helix to Quadruple Helix and this is also called for in the
EU Bioeconomist Strategy.
But how do we do it?
What is Quadruple Helix?
What is the Fourth Helix?
This is the sort of research that we are involved in the
Bioeconomy research at CRS
Well one of the biggest challenges, with the transition to sustainable
Bioeconomy is that the increase of need and use of Biomass.
So how can we balance different types of needs and use of Biomass?
For example, in the Forestry Based
Bioeconomy, the forest industry, of course needs the Biomass for its production but the same Biomass can also be used by tourists and for leisure.
It's also an attractive living environment.
People like painters and artists, writers are inspired by the forest
So we need to find methods to balance the different types of view of the forest in a sustainable way.
Perhaps different types of eco-systems services could be a way of addressing and balancing these challenges.
In terms of opportunities, the great opportunity, with the transition to a Forestry Based Bioeconomy is the circular economy.
Which means that you have a resource sufficient economy.
You use every bit of the tree, all the way from the felling of the tree to the product in a mill, but not only that, you also make use of all the waste streams to become input in another industry and totally different lines of industry.
For example, plastic replacement or textiles.
Our centres view on Biobased Economy starts out from 2 premises.
The first one being service innovation where we do a lot of research on and service innovation from our perspective means that we are focusing on how customers are perceiving what is being innovated.
So we are starting our innovation processes from what types of values that the customers are interested in and thereby restructuring the innovation processes and projects.
The other premise that we are interested in and I think is important from this point
 of view is servicilisation.
Servicilisation means that companies are moving from the traditional manufacturing industries that they have been into.
To moving into a more consumer or customer or societal organisation focusing on the values that those entities are interested in.
In the process of forming this strategy, we were encouraged by the S3 Platform in Seville to integrate the gender perspective in the strategy.
So we formed a process with a gender expert that gave us input and feedback in 2 steps in the work of forming this strategy.
So I believe we now are the first region in Europe having this gender perspective on Smart Specialisation. 
Within gender and Smart
Specialisation, we have an interactive research approach, which means that we actually work hands on with the companies from different branches like manufacturing, digital communication and Forest Based Economy. and this kind of work is the way to drive innovation including different branches and also opening up through gender as a tool.
Challenges and opportunities within the forest based industry and other branches that are male coded concerning gender is not just due to the number of men and women working within the company.
It's all about developing the company culture and the core valued within the company to drive innovation, to drive social sustainability and also to foremost drive the business development into the future.
For BillerudKorsnäs, it's very important that the region has
Forest Bio-Based Economy on top of its agenda because that creates a a good opportunity to actually collaborate even further with other companies within the forest based industry but also with the consultants and academics.
A close collaboration with Karlstas
University for BillerudKorsnä is of course important,
If it means that we have access to all the research that is done.
For example, in material development and in service solutions but the main thing, of course, is as a recruitment base.
To have a local university where you have well educated people and give us the opportunity to actually show the student of today and tomorrow that we have great opportunities for fun jobs in the region.
I think that is one major thing and that all fun jobs are actually in Stockholm.
My role in Paper Province is to make sure that good business ideas in the Forest Based Bioeconomy reaches the market and expands from the very early phase, the scouting of good business ideas in research and in companies and also around the skilled personnel within the branch to setting up teams and also helping in initial sales and funding of these companies.
We have developed an acceleration program that is named BioExpress that is used to kick start companies within mature branches as the forest industry.
The basic idea of this kick start program is to very rapidly come and find the first customers and it's based on 3 main things.
The first principle is that the inventor doesn't need to be the entrepreneur so they can leave an idea and let it be commercialised in this program.
The second one is that we actively man the teams to be able to create a successful company and in this creation of the team, we combine young entrepreneurs from the business school with an interest in the forest industry together with senior competence from the industry within sales or industrialists or the technicians if that is needed.
And the third thing is that we actively also use the complete branch network to find the first customers, to build the first machines and so on.
It is to wrap it in a secure way to reach the market.
With use of the strong networks here, we can reach results after 3 months that would take 5 - 10 years to reach in metropolitan areas like
Stockholm that doesn't have that branch, deep branch contact and the experience of doing business. so it's very, very effective to use business contacts that exist through the world from Värmland to very fast goods market.
