Hello, everyone! Today we'll talk about the slingshot maneuvers or gravity assist or something we call flybys which are maneuvers that allow to reach the outer region of the solar system or the inner region whenever the Delta V capability of the spacecraft is not sufficient, to get to this faraway destination we use this technique.
We have the example of new Horizon the NASA spacecraft that had as the destination the flyby of Pluto. It was launched in Jan 2006.
It did the gravity assist maneuver by Jupiter in February 2007.
And eventually reached Pluto in
Without that gravity assist by
Jupiter it would not have been possible to go to this far away region of the solar system and the flyby at this dwarf planet Pluto.
Let's look at the overall situation at the scale of the solar system the flyby situation we have here, which is departure point we have the gravity-assist planet which could be mass Jupiter is we want to go beyond Jupiter and we have the target here which could be Saturn or Pluto in the case of new Horizons.
Now, all the velocities depicted here are capitals Vs, so they're
Heliocentric velocities. When I say
Heliocentric, it's with respect to inertial heliocentric coordinate system.
We have initially Ve which is the heliocentric velocity of the Earth we launch with a spacecraft towards the gravity-assist planets with a capital V1, and we get with a capital V2 - velocity within the sphere of influence the gravity-assist planets.
At the exit of the sphere of influence of the gravity-assist planets, we are at this point with velocity V5 and you see here that V5 in amplitude is larger than
V2, on one hand, and as a different directions so that it will allow to read this heliocentric orbit after the gravity-assist maneuver toward the target.
Let's look at the detail of the slingshot maneuver profile.
We have here the gravity-assist planets, we have its heliocentric velocity Vp, so the sun is down in the spectre.
The arrival of the spacecrafts at the boundary of the sphere of influence of the gravity-assist planet is at this point with the heliocentric velocity V2. We need to substract the heliocentric velocity of the planet to find
V3 which, in fact, is equal to "v" arrival infinity.
This is the planet centric velocity of our spacecraft entering the sphere of influence of the planet. As we know, it will follow inside the sphere of influence at hyperbolic trajectory and will exit the sphere of influence of the planet at this point with a planet centric velocity this V4, which is equal to vd v departure infinity, small "v" because it's planet centric we need to add to Vd infinity the value Vp in order to get heliocentric velocity of this spacecraft at the exit of this sphere of influence. And let's look at this relationship.
On this drawing here we have V2
Heliocentric velocity getting into the sphere of influence. We have Vp
-the heliocentric velocity of the planet. V5-the spacecraft heliocentric velocity exiting the sphere of influence and we see that the amplitude, on one hand, the direction of V5 has been modified by the swingby by the planets and the main thing is that really the V5 amplitude is larger than the one of
V2, so we've gained a lot of kinetic energy.
Let's look at some slingshot maneuver parameters
We arrive with our spacecraft here, with the Va infinity, in the sphere of influence of the planets.
We depart at this point still, at the boundary of the sphere of influence of the planets. With the velocity Vd infinity, small "v" which is the planet centric velocity.
Now, we're interested in the value of Beta, respectively value of Delta
This deviation angle here, this is what we are interested in.
Is, in fact, equal to 180 degrees minus Delta or 180°-2Beta.
So, we want to know the value of
Beta.
On the basis of all of the parameters of the encounter.
One important parameter is the impact parameter, which is D infinity which we have here.
And out of the properties of the hyperbola that we saw before we have the other important parameters here, we have here "a", and here we have
"rp", the closest decent to the center of the planet at this point. Periopsis of the trajectory.
Now if you project the center of the planet to the arrival asymptote, we get to this point and we know from the properties of the hyperbola that we also have "a" here.
What we are interested in again is a value Beta and let's go through the steps allowing us to determine that, we have "a" equal μ, divided by Va infinity square.
So, we know the value of "a", because we know the value of v infinity.
We choose the value of Delta in order to reach our goal, which is certain value of the deviation angle.
If we look at this triangle, right angle triangle, we can resolve it and we have
"rp" plus "a" equal to square root of "μ" square divided by "va" infinity to the power 4 plus "d" infinity square.
So, as we have chosen "d" infinity, we know this value, we know also this parameter here.
So, knowing "a" we can determine the value of "rp".
Now, the Cos Beta is equal to
"a" divided by "a" plus "rp".
So, we can determine the value of
Beta, knowing "a" and "rp" from here. If we know Beta, then we know the value of the deviation angle.
OK, we look at the example of
Cassini-Huygens which had 4 flybys in order to reach Saturn.
We have here the launch, in October 1997.
Then we are on the green trajectory until the first Venus flyby at this point in April 1998.
Then we are on the red trajectory, until the second Venus flyby in June 1999.
Then at this point we have on the dark blue trajectory following the second Venus flyby, a flyby of the Earth which will give us an increased energy of the orbit in order to allow
Jupiter flyby in December 2004 with the final destination about 7 years after launch of Saturn in
July 2004.
Now we look at the short video showing the last flyby out of 4 flybys of the spacecraft Rosetta, inbound to a comet of
Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
The spacecraft was launching in 2004 from French Guiana on Ariane 5 rockets. And reached its destination
10 years later in 2014.
Out of 4 flybys, we'll see the
4th flyby here.
First seen from the top of the solar system and then from the spacecraft itself, as it got very close to planet Earth.
OK, we see Rozetta in green, we see it approaching the Earth and here we have the flyby of the gravity-assist, this is now seen from Rosetta itself. It will come very close to the Earth at about
2005 km from Earth.
It is very nice view of approaching the Earth. Very close.
Wow! The swingby, then we look back at the Earth, after the flyby is complete. Then, again the energy gain on this last flyby was sufficient to move Rosetta to a very far away destination to Solar system for meeting with a comet. We see here the resulting trajectory.
