Hello everyone!
Today we will talk about the geomagnetic field and the distortions of the geomagnetic field due to the solar wind.
Here we have an expression of the value of the B field the amplitude of the B field vector in the vicinity of the Earth, because it's basically a bi-polar magnetic field pretty much like the one you have with a magnet which has a magnetic north pole, magnetic south pole and this is the expression again, of the amplitude of the B vector as a function of R, the distance from the center of the Earth and λ, which is the latitude, pretty much like the latitude on the surface of the earth, whether λ0 being the equator and the +90 being the north pole, and -90 the south pole.
Now, let's say here that the geomagnetic field is essentially a bi-polar field slightly off center from the center of the Earth.
We will talk about this offset later, but for time being let's consider that it's centered on the center of the Earth and you have that value as a function of R, λ, and B0 is the value of the magnetic field amplitude either in Gauss or in Tesla, 3.12x(10^(-5)) Tesla on the equator and on the surface of the Earth.
Now, as far as the shape of the magnetic field line distribution is, this is what you have again it's a standard bi-polar magnetic field.
By the way, you have here the North magnetic pole and here the South magnetic pole, and these are not co-located with the geographical poles of the Earth and they are about eleven degrees away from the geographical poles and there is a slow drift of the location, as well the North and South magnetic poles on the surface of the Earth.
Right now we have the North magnetic pole, which is in
Northern Canada, but it's drifting slowly about ten kilometers every year.
It's moving toward Northern Siberia, so in a few decades we will have the North magnetic pole in Siberia, no longer in Northern Canada, like it is now.
Now what we've depicted here also this outer radiation belt or the van Allen belts, which are areas with increased radiation the inner radiation belt, which is depicted here that goes down to about
500 to 600 kilometers above the Earth's surface is mainly populated by quite high energy electrons and protons, and the outer radiation belt here is mainly electrons, pretty high velocities respectively energy, these are areas that we try to avoid with the spacecraft we try to have a relatively rapid go through the radiation belt because obviously, this could be damaging for electronic components of a spacecraft.
Again, this is a summary, we have high energy protons and electrons trapped in two regions of the magnetosphere the van Allen or the radiation belts protons and electrons in the radiation belt and electrons only in the outer radiation belt.
Near the bottom you have the value of the energy radiation particles, typically more than 30keV to 100MeV. here we have a large scale artist representation of the geomagnetic field with it's distortion due to the solar wind.
Now this drawing is not to scale, obviously if you look at the sun on the left hand side, the size of the sun and the position of the Earth and the size of the Earth, this is not the scale but just look at the representation of the magnetic field of the Earth in the vicinity of the Earth first, and then when we go further away with several Earth radii away from the Earth, you see this significant distortion due to the solar wind.
What is interesting is that, you have here the so called polar cusps, which will allow particles of the solar wind mainly high energy protons, to enter the relatively low region of the Earth's atmosphere.
Charge particles normally don't cross magnetic field lines but they attract them, they go along them maybe in spiral shape, but these are areas where the solar wind particles, mainly high energy electrons and protons can penetrate the high layers of the atmosphere and create the Aurora phenomenon, as well as Northern lights and Southern lights.
What is interesting also, is that in the anti-sun direction you have open magnetic field lines trailing in the far away regions of the Solar system.
Here, the representation of Northern and,
Southern lights again this is due to the fact that in the polar region you have a possibility of penetration of the Solar wind particles in the lower layers of the atmosphere high and low layers of the atmosphere created by exaltation of mainly oxygen atoms higher state of energy of these atoms and then there is the de-excitation producing this light phenomenon, mainly green light because this is the wave length corresponding to this de-excitation of particles of oxygen in the atmosphere.
Normally these are located along the so called oval around the Northern magnetic pole, and the Southern magnetic pole and all of the vertical lines that you see in these Aurora or Norther on Southern lights correspond to the direction of the magnetic field lines, which again in the region of the poles are nearly perpendicular to the surface as opposed to the equatorial regions where you have the magnetic field lines pretty much horizontal.
Another feature that we can point out is that the presence of the constellation
Orion here you see the Orion's belt here with the three aligned stars, in fact it's Orion upside down with the three stars which are very visible in the winter from the northern hemisphere with the naked eye.
This is the view of the Earth from the International Space Station taken recently where over the Indian ocean, it's at night we have the landscape illuminated by the moon and we have a beautiful view of the southern lights.
We are in the vicinity of the south magnetic pole which is somewhat on the right hand side of the picture and a very clear view of the southern lights and also of the air glow, which gives you a scale of the height of the southern lights themselves the air glow being at 100km above the Earth's surface.
It's accelerated motion, it's been taken so that you have about ten times increased velocity of the space station versus the Earth, we move fast but not as fast as you can see here.
It's interesting to see the vertical line and the structure of these Southern lights which are along the magnetic field line which in the vicinity of the South magnetic pole are close to the vertical, you see also a lot of dynamics in the Southern lights.
