Hello everyone. Today we'll look at catch up rates between nearby orbits and specifically, initially we look at
2 co planar circular orbits.
There is the upper orbit here, and the lower orbit here.
And they are close together which means that the delta R, the difference between the radii of theses 2 orbits is small compared to
R, the radius of the upper orbit.
We have delta R, much smaller than R.
And the question we ask ourselves is after one full orbit, if we have these initial conditions here with the 2 spacecrafts, the upper and the lower on the same local vertical.
After one full orbit, what will be the delta X?
How much forward will the lower spacecraft move with respect to the upper spacecraft?
We can represent the final conditions here after one full orbit. 
And the question is delta X after one orbit put a question mark.
And again, we consider close by orbits and we'll use these expressions a lot when we talk about the rendezvous in the near future.
So let's start with the expression for the period this is the 3rd Kepler's law.
It's 2 pi times square root of A cubed over mu.
Or 2 pi, 1 over square root of mu.
I can put here R to the 3 halfs. 
A or R, the same here.
We have 2 circular orbits and semi major axis or radius is the same.
So we have the derivative of T versus R equals 3 pi times 1 over square root of mu
R to the one half.
Or 3 pi, square root of R over mu, which is in fact equal to 3 pi times the reciprocal of the circle of velocity.
Okay, we are nearly there now.
We can multiply by the circular velocity.
And we have V-circ times delta T. We replace the DT by delta T, is equal to delta X.
In fact, that's what we are looking for.
And 3 pi times delta R.
So this is an interesting result.
We see that after one full orbit, the lower spacecraft would have moved forward of the upper spacecraft by 3 pi times the difference in altitude of the 2 orbits or about 10 times.
It's about 10.
And that's... interesting to know.
Suppose you are with a chaser,
it can be the space shuttle, it can be a Soyuz, on the same local vertical as the international space station at some point
100 meters below after one full orbit should be 1 kilometer ahead.
And this is an important value to keep in mind for the rendezvous which we'll handle later int he course.
Now let's look at a somewhat different situation where we have the lower spacecraft not on a circular orbit close to the circular orbit of the upper object.
But on elliptical orbit with the A semi major axis relatively close to the value of R, the radius of the circular orbit of the upper body.
So...
We have the 2 spacecrafts initially together.
And after one full orbit, we'll have the lower spacecraft on the elliptical orbit inside the circular orbit of the upper body, and will have moved forward by a value of delta X.
So, we can write, outer orbit is circular with a radius of R, and the inner orbit is elliptical with a semi major axis...
A.
With A less than R.
And we have these conditions with R minus A, an absolute value much less than R.
Now we have a situation which is quite similar to the previous one.
You know the period is dependent only on the semi major axis of an elliptical orbit.
And whether the inner orbit is circular, or elliptical, doesn't matter what counts.
Is it a semi major axis? Or if it's circular, the value of R which is the semi major axis of a circular orbit.
So we have a similar expression to what we had before with the delta X, after one full orbit.
Equal to 3 pi times, but this time instead of delta R, we have R minus A.
So this is a similar expression to the one we had before but for the inner... orbit, or the orbit of the lower body being elliptical instead of circular.
And we have a delta X, positive, for the lower object with the A less than the value of R.
So we have A less than R, and we have delta X negative, for A more than R.
And that's like we had before. 
Obviously if you have an elliptical orbit larger than the circular orbit, after one full orbit the object on the elliptical orbit will have been trailing behind if the elliptical orbit is smaller than this object.
From this the elliptical orbit will be leading forward of the circular orbit after one full revolution.
Here we summarize what we talked about before for 2 circular orbits after one full orbit, the delta X.
The difference in X of the 2 objects separated by a delta R much smaller than R will be about 10 times the difference in altitude.
And for circular/ closed elliptical orbit it's going to be a factor 10 also multiplied by the difference between the radius of the circular orbit, the semi major axis, of the elliptical orbit.
If the elliptical orbit is larger than the circular orbit, this object on the elliptical orbit will be trailing behind.
If it is smaller, it will be leading forward after one full orbit.
And here we offer you again a summary of the situation.
Try to remember these expressions, they are really important for the rendezvous.
2 circular orbits which are very closed together, the lower object will be leading forward after one full orbit by about 10 times the difference in altitude.
And for a circular versus elliptical orbit, it's also a factor of 10 multiplied by the difference between the radius of the circular orbit and the semi major axis of the elliptical orbit.
