Hi! I'm Nettra Pan.
And I'm Shirah Foy.
You'll be seeing the both of us throughout this MOOC with tips and information on how to make the most of this course.
We're both based at EPFL, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, Switzerland.
EPFL has established amazing long term partnerships with outstanding academic institutions across the African continent.
In this video, we're going to be introducing to you 5 entrepreneurs who are facing issues similar to the ones you're going to be learning about in this course.
In the next few months, we're planning to add more interviews to our archives from West Africa,
South Africa, and around the world.
<i>(Nettra) We caught up with the entrepreneurs</i>
<i>that you'll be meeting this week in Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, and Uganda.</i>
They work in a range of industries from medical technologies to agriculture to mobile technologies and finance.
But the one thing that they all had in common was the entrepreneurial mindset.
They brought resources together to create value where before, there were little or none.
The other thing that they had in common was that they all shared a defining entrepreneurial moment, decision, or event.
Finally, they all engaged in the long process of developing their venture.
As they introduce themselves, really try to put yourself in their situation and think about how you would've brought together resources in similar conditions with the same constraints.
Because resource constraints are a challenge faced by every entrepreneur in every country and in every industry.
OK. Let's meet some entrepreneurs.
Our first featured entrepreneur,
Joel Macharia, adopted the entrepreneurial mindset at a very young age.
This led him to start a financial news company and a financial consulting business among others.
I like how Joel talked about the mental strength required to be a successful entrepreneur.
This is especially important for high growth tech entrepreneurs who are often working in fast paced and high stress environments.
In a way, you're going to be seeing how Joel talks about this process of entrepreneurship as going from a <i>no to a yes.</i>
He says that for every one year, you can expect to hear the word <i>no</i> about 100 times.
Along his entrepreneurial process, he also talks about how important it was for him to have the support of his friends and family.
With the support and his mental determination, he managed to perfect his offer for investors and clients, transforming all of those <i>noes</i> to a big <i>yes</i>.
My name is Joel Macharia.
I'm 28 years old.
I'll be 28 in August.
I'm the founder of Capital Associates, which I started in August of 2007 when I was 21.
Capital Associates is currently a financial consulting business focused on small businesses and helping them figure out how to manage their money, how to access capital, and just kept to be proper businesses when it comes to running and handling their finances.
On top of that, we're building an online platform that will allow retail investors, individuals to invest in the Nairobi Stock Exchange providing them the tools, tips, tutorials on how to get started and how to invest.
That platform is called Abacus from the old calculator.
I started my interest in the financial markets in the Nairobi Securities Exchange or the Stock Exchange as it was known.
I started back when I was in high school.
When in my last year and my fourth form, we had a trip to the NSE.
I couldn't understand how people seem to make money out of nothing, pieces of paper that were selling for some reason or the other at higher and higher prices.
I wasn't used to not understanding concepts so it became an obsession.
I guess I liked math.
This was something mathematical, or it felt very mathematical.
In 2004 when I graduated from high school-- actually after my KCSO, I went into the Nairobi Stock Exchange, and I asked them to give [an introduction].
I got a job doing data entry somewhere in the filing rooms and full records that were being digitized.
But I felt like
I wasn't learning anything.
They didn't give me an opportunity to learn about how the market actually worked.
So I left and started to do my own research.
I spent all day in a cybercafe cafe because back then 3G hadn't picked up.
It was really expensive to get online on your phone.
We didn't have WiMax connections.
We didn't have free Wi-Fi.
We didn't have cable connections into the homes.
So you know, for 500 shillings, a shilling a minute,
I'll have a whole day's worth of surfing.
I'm going and go to Investopedia.
I still remember this.
I loved Investopedia.
I'd copy a lot of their tutorials, explanations, and how the market worked and what was what.
I'd paste that to a one document, and then save that, and then go home and use that and read that all day.
I'd read it and then go to the Stock Market.
I'll call my stockbroker and ask several questions.
I borrowed money from my dad to invest in the stock market when there's an IPO coming up.
The IPO did very well.
I turned that into other investments because it went up.
I sold my share.
Instead of taking the money out,
I decided to buy other shares.
My dad also got interested.
He asked me to take him through while I was doing to teach him.
That's how I got started teaching people around how to invest in the stock exchange.
Between 2004 when I graduated from high school and 2007, the market was on a tear.
It was bull market and it hit
It's highest peak in 2006.
It was a success investment.
That's where everybody wanted to put their money into.
It was very easy for me--
- Sorry.
<i>- It's okay.</i>
I was very easy for me to get more and more people be interested in learning.
What happened is they'd learned how the market worked.
The next thing they want is-- they'd be like, "Here,"
They'll give me a sum,
"Here are 100,000 shillings.
Why don't you pick the shares?
You know I'm a doctor,
I have patients to deal with.
300,000 shillings. Invest this for us."
That's why I started Capital Associates.
It was ideally you're partnering in capital.
My first entrepreneurial experience,
I think what I do remember was actually trading food.
I think it must've been, what, nine years old, where my mom paid.
We had an account to a small eatery very close to the school where I was at.
We'd go over, eat I think up to
30 shillings, and then go back to school.
My mom would pay this, either at the end of the day--
This was within our office complex.
I remember going in and taking chapatis, which is some flat kind of bread.
We marketed it to school and exchanging that.
I'd have five chapatis and I'd sell those in school.
I trade one chapati with somebody who had rice, another one for somebody who had beans so I had my meal.
Then I'd sell that at three and buy sweets.
I think that's [las de alias]
I can remember.
I do remember selling bread in high school.
Airtime, I mean cell phones had just become the thing.
I was a prefect in high school so I can get away with a lot of things so people brought me their cell phones to keep for them and charge, and just make sure they didn't get confiscated by the rest of the prefects.
Selling Airtime, selling bread in the school, writing letters, poetry.
Poetry was actually one of the things I did a lot of.
I remember my trademark.
Poem would be the first letter of-- so it spelled the name going down and then using each letter
[at the beginning] of the sentence.
Then of course, after high school, it's been pretty much different experiences, experimenting with exporting handicrafts. under the African Growth and Opportunity Act which went into the US tax-free, sold cars, imported.
My business partner had a cousin who would send the cars over from the UK.
Then we would sell them here.
Then we put money together, bought accident vehicles, write-offs and fix them up and put them back on the road and sold them.
I mean it's been a varied set of experiences.
The [alias] I can remember it's actually the chapatis back in-- must've been eight or nine years old.
One my favorite quotes says that entrepreneurship is living a few years of your life in a way most people won't, to live the rest of it in a way most people can't.
It's actually a difficult thing.
You have to be ready for it and never give up because that's where--
Get your resources in place in terms of personal support.
Spouse, make sure they know what it is.
Parents, family, get those because those are the things that will matter the most.
An entrepreneur will get that [person] eight hours a day that they can sell.
Find 5 of them, the funding to build an office and then go out and get the business.
Make sure that all five have-- by pulling all this and paying all these costs, then it's left with something on top of it, which is the profit.
That role is a very solitary role.
It's a very difficult role.
I mean noes exceed yeses by a factor of 1 to 100.
So for every one year, you probably need to go through 100 noes.
The thing you can do is to prepare yourself mentally to realize that you need to keep your perspective.
You need to always remember what you're looking for.
If I was to offer advice to an entrepreneur who's thinking of going into entrepreneurship or somebody who's thinking of going into entrepreneurship, invest in yourself.
That would be what I tell them.
Ideally, what happens is that, for very, very long time--
I mean, by the classical definition of what an entrepreneur is, it's somebody who puts resources together.
I know guys who have been in business seven years.
They have been researching seven years, and they still haven't figured out how to get started.
There will never be a right time for anything.
You always get started now.
Make the decisions.
Be decisive. Move forward.
Then pick the results as they're coming.
Then make the next decision.
<i>(interviewer) Thank you very much.</i>
Many of you may be familiar with the serial entrepreneur,
Richard Branson.
When asked by a journalist,
"Why did you go into business?"
Richard Branson says that he realized that he never actually wanted to go into business.
He says he was just interested in creating things.
Well, our next entrepreneur sounds a lot like Richard Branson.
His name is Yohans Wodaje.
Like Branson, Yohans, wasn't fixated on the idea of going into business.
He says he didn't even know what the word "entrepreneur" meant until very recently.
Yohans simply brought resources together.
This was medical information with the web platform and then became medical services with mobile technology.
Slowly but surely, Yohans brought resources together to create value.
When he was feeling stretched, that's when he sought business partners and staff to help him sustain his venture.
Another thing to listen for Yohans's story is how he de-risked his venture along the way.
At the beginning of an entrepreneurial process, the chance that a venture will fail is very high compared to the chances that it will succeed.
Yohans says that in a developing country, the risks are even higher.
That's why it's so important to develop your venture in a way that reduces risks.
Let's switch over it to Yohans.
I was born and raised in Ethiopia here in Addis.
I went to medicine school here.
I'm a medical doctor by profession.
That's how I'm related to medicine.
I worked in the rural parts of Ethiopia right after medicine school.
During that time,
I was thinking about what I could do because I wanted to do something on my own.
Also, it was very visible to me the scale of limitations in infrastructure we have in this country.
So I got interested in systems, the health systems.
Then when I came back to the city after working in the rural parts of Ethiopia,
I had the opportunity to work with friends from other walks of life who are in technology and engineering.
We just set up websites in the hopes of creating a platform for people to get access to health information in their local language, into Amharic, and also thinking of expanding it to other local languages.
With that endeavor, we set up this website.
Eventually, I got introduced to another company that was working on increasing access, ability of services to people by creating a platform that allows people to access different services on their mobile phones.
Then it became a nice marriage within these two companies, rises up my company,
Telemed Medical Services and partner up with BelCash Technology Solutions, which is a company, that the mobile enabler company.
We set up product for Hello Doctor that allows people to access health advisory services using their mobile phones or any phone actually and be able to talk or consult with a doctor.
I actually learned that word very recently.
If you're asking me, I think it was when I was in high school.
I saw people that I looked up to that were doing things, that started things.
I kind of had the desire to also do something or to start something.
I cannot quite put a finger on what's really attracted me to starting something on my own and becoming an entrepreneur.
But I've always been passionate when I get interested in a certain thing, whatever it is.
It could be music.
It could be whatever thing
I start thinking about,
I tend to be passionate about it to continue to dwell on it, and have the urge to take it sort of in my own way.
I can't quite see that as the thing that attracted me about it.
Also, there's a lot of things that I feel about doing something on your own, or starting something on your own.
You cannot do anything on your own.
You basically start something on your own and eventually built the team that helps you do it.
The beautiful thing about that,,
I think the most fulfilling feeling is that the sense of creating something or starting something.
That's a very fulfilling feeling.
I did feel I had the skills to be able to do what I had in mind, which was create a platform to be able to teach people or to help people access information.
That's why we were doing it when we started the website with friends.
We didn't have a company then.
The need to create a company came later on as things progressed.
I really didn't have time to stop and reflect on whether I can set up a company and run a company or anything like that.
It just sort of happened.
Eventually, once it actually started to grow
--grow in a sense like very [small], yeah?--
It stopped becoming just me, and I started hiring people.
When those things came,
I actually got the sense of what it means.
This is really a company.
People are relying on us so we're hiring people.
We have to make paycheck.
We have to make payroll every month and all those questions.
Then we start asking those questions.
Am I really going to push through?
Are we going to be able to do this?
You've already done something that you feel like you could.
I guess from my experience, the advice
I can give to aspiring entrepreneurs is to think of two things.
One, that you may not be able to do it all on your own.
That may mean that you have to give a share of your bread.
But if you want to make things happen and get things moving,
I think it's really smart to look into partnerships.
It really helps not just in terms of getting things to roll out fast, not just in terms of lowering your initial costs.
It's also very helpful in terms of having a party.
When you're doing good, your partner may be not doing well and use the one that's giving the push and then vice versa.
In your [...], you have a partner that's saying like,
"It has worked out well for us, so come."
It sort of pushes each other.
Find the right marriage and always do things, make things easier.
Whatever you can do by partnering and giving it to the right people to do themselves and sharing
I think is a good strategy.
That has helped us.
In any developing country,
--I don't think it's very unique to Addis Abbaba or Ethiopia-- there's a lot of things that could test your patience.
Most developing countries are just starting to really make robust infrastructure when it comes to-- especially if you work in the IT sector.
Telecom services can be not so reliable at times and tricky.
But it's important to understand that in mostly like that, it's important to strategize for it to sort of mitigate that risk from the outset.
That's one thing that's unique to functioning in an emerging market,
I think, that we have had to deal with.
As we're growing, so is our telco industry.
We're sort of learning at the same time.
It's important like I say, to be patient and understand, and actually develop the relationship and that forces investing in the relationship.
<i>- Okay. Thank you very much.</i>
- You're welcome.
Up next is an inspiring young woman named Clarisse Iribagiza, who started her company while still in university in the year 2010.
This was a time when access to information was a big problem in Rwanda.
On the other hand, high levels of mobile penetration with over 90 % of the population having access to mobile phones presented a huge opportunity.
With HeHe Labs, Ltd, Clarisse created a content and feedback management application, first via SMS and now via smartphone applications.
The system leveraged existing infrastructure by letting people receive new information on devices they already owned.
Clarisse doesn't mention that here, but they actually lost one of HeHe Labs' early clients when the client themselves lost their license to operate.
This was a huge blow to her team's morale as that particular client had brought a lot of optimism and income to the venture.
Needless to say, HeHe Labs recovered and has moved on.
Clarisse's story shows just how unpredictable and exciting the entrepreneurial journey can be.
Well, my name is Clarisse Iribagiza.
I'm 26 years old. I'm a computer engineer.
<i>(interviewer) Okay.
Please tell us about your venture.</i>
HeHe Labs is a mobile technologies company.
We're almost five years old now.
We've been building mobile information systems across East Africa, in the sectors of agriculture, healthcare, transportation, and education.
<i>(interviewer) Beautiful!</i>
<i>What attracted you to starting your own business?</i>
When we founded HeHe Labs,
I was part of a college group that was working on a project.
We were just really inspired by the ability to impact change with the skill set that we had.
Given the environment that we were in that really encouraged entrepreneurship, it was quite easy for us to get started.
I never quite imagine myself becoming an entrepreneur in the context of founding a company.
But as a child, I always worked on different projects to sort of solve whatever problem
I saw around myself.
Maybe it was a class project or something with my friends, with my family.
I was always around just building solutions.
That's what I define as entrepreneurship.
I would say that we're in the mobile technology space because when it comes to information technologies, we believe that it's a great opportunity to connect people to information.
We know that information is empowering.
When it comes to leveraging the mobile phone as a platform for delivering our services,
I would say that it's as basic as the fact that a lot of Rwandans have access to a mobile device close to 70%.
It's pretty much the easiest way to get to the last man and to get to the last mile when delivering the information that we need for people to access.
I think the one skill that's needed really is just the willingness to learn.
A lot of what we do even as a business is we're always trying out new things so we need to learn every single day.
I think that the ability to learn new things was what stood out for me as an ability to help me become an entrepreneur.
<i>(interviewer)
Did you develop other skills</i>
<i>as you were building the business?</i>
I did develop a lot of other skills, skills around leadership, collaboration, business development as well as technical skills that include finance and other things around product design, which I've come to pick up along the way.
<i>(interviewer) Did you face any challenges?</i>
Yes. I have faced a couple of challenges mostly because we've pretty much been doing new things every single day here at HeHe Labs.
Most of our challenges include just figuring out what's next – that's always difficult – finding the resources to make it happen, working in an environment where some of the ideas that we have are relatively new so just getting people to believe in our products and use them.
Those are some of the challenges that we face.
Let's go back to the idea of the entrepreneurial mindset, which is the willingness to see opportunity in uncertain and rapidly changing conditions.
Stone Atwine, our next entrepreneur, will tell you about how he saw opportunity in a problem faced by his grandmother; the difficulty of receiving money.
While others may have looked at the situation and seen bank fees, complex regulations as chaos,
Stone and his team saw this area as representing a problem that needed to be solved and a problem that had a lot of value behind it.
The interesting thing about the entrepreneurial mindset that Stone and his team exemplifies is that it's something that doesn't just happen at the beginning of the entrepreneurial process.
It's something that you'll need throughout the experience.
As Stone and his team developed the idea behind remit.ug, there were moments when he thought they should close shop.
He says, "OK, guys, can we wrap this up?"
Luckily, Stone and his team still saw value in what they were doing.
They persevered and they're still doing this today.
An inspiration.
My name is Stone Atwine.
I'm 32 years old from Uganda.
I started computer science at school.
I'm an entrepreneur.
<i>(interviewer) Fantastic!
Tell us about your venture.</i>
What we've done is we've built a web-based platform, remit.ug, which helps people in the diaspora or people all over the world to send money from their cards, that's Visa and MasterCard, to mobile money in Africa.
We've started with Uganda, delivery into Uganda.
Initially, I had this idea to transfer money back home from the diaspora, from all over the world.
I noticed that there was-- their current system was broken in terms of it's very inconvenient, and it's expensive.
I had this idea and I knew
I couldn't do it alone, so initially, I shared it with a friend of mine,
Teddy Ruge.
At that point, I was living in Nairobi.
I was working in Nairobi, and Teddy was living in Texas.
Because he had all these connections with the diaspora and was working, doing work along those lines,
I chose to tell him.
What was interesting is when I told Teddy about my idea, he told me that he also had the same idea and was actually facing the same problem, that same challenge of sending money home from the US.
He actually sent me his notes that he had drawn up from before.
Basically, we were both trying to do the same thing.
We said, "OK, we're going to try and find some money and do this," but we share little bit.
Then at the beginning of 2013,
I came back home from Nairobi to stay.
At that point, Teddy was also actually in Uganda.
One evening, I was hanging out talking to a guy.
We're just talking about the local tech ecosystem, another friend called Collin.
I told him that we want to do this, me and Teddy, we want to do something along money transfer.
Collin goes like, "Hey, we've actually been talking about this."
Collin has had this other gentleman, David.
They had also been planning on building something like this.
Actually, they already had a prototype.
These are four people.
All of us just by coincidence, we talked about doing the same thing.
Each of us has done a lot about it.
Essentially, I called up Teddy that evening. We sat down.
One hour later, we had agreed to act together.
Within the next week, we had just set the company and gotten everything done.
We continued and built a minimum viable product.
We've been testing, and now we are ready for the big turn.
We saw the need to do this, to start this company because one, is we were actually facing this problem ourselves.
Then you sit down and think and say... in my case, I'm like,
"Why is it so hard to send money to my grandmother?
I mean it shouldn't be this hard."
Because I was in Nairobi, there was M-Pesa.
There was mobile money in Uganda.
The first thing was, "How come these two networks can't talk so I can't send this money as easy as when I'm in Uganda?"
Actually, initially, what I used to do is I would ask,
I'd do a bank transfer to a friend of mine in Uganda.
My friend would pull out the money and put it in my Ugandan mobile money.
Then I would send it to my grandmother, so it was hectic because my grandmother is not interested in the banks, and all that stuff.
She didn't even have access to the banks.
It was mostly because of the struggle.
Then seeing the solution and saying,
"Oh, we could actually use mobile to pull this off."
Starting this was essentially because we were suffering from this problem of transferring money.
Then you sit down and say,
"Ah, it's out of necessity."
Then we were like, "We can actually make money out of this.
We'd actually start a business and in the process help people."
I remember in the beginning when we were starting, we were looking for a lot of information about remittances and this business of money transfer.
We read reports from the World Bank, from the African Development Bank, from various NGOs.
They were all pointing to the fact that the current money transfer system is very expensive.
It's very inconvenient.
It was almost a dual point like two big guys who do this.
They're charging you.
I mean moving money from Johannesburg to Kampala could cost up to 20% of the money you're trying to move.
If you're trying to move $200, you could end up paying $40, $34.
If you're moving $100, you could pay $18.
That's how we started.
We sat down. We looked at the costs of sending money.
We said we could actually put only one fee.
Our fee is just one 5.4% and charge that.
It will be much, much easier.
We bring down the cost on the persons we're helping-- we're helping both the senders and the recipients because they get more money in their pockets.
<i>(interviewer) It's 1.5% that you take?</i>
- Us?
- Yeah.
<i>-Oh 5.4.</i>
5.4%. We really want to bring this down.
The reason we charge 5.4%-- we think it's high still, but we have challenges with like card transfer.
I'm not sure.
I guess it was the need to solve problems that people I see every day face.
Beyond that, right from when I was a young guy,
I was like building things.
I like building things.
Building things, I'm solving problems.
I guess it's something that I was meant to do.
And the need to help people.
The skills that make a successful entrepreneur,
I think you really have to have a lot of endurance.
You have to have grit, not give up.
You have to understand what you're doing.
You have to manage to people.
That's very critical.
But I guess the most important thing is the need to build things and the capacity to stay that course and make sure you follow through all the time, every time.
The advice is to really start.
You have to go out there.
You have to start.
I mean you could have all these plans and dreams.
But if you don't take the first step of starting, then you're not going to go anywhere.
It is go out there, start, try, and see.
You're going to fail, maybe you're going to do it, but you have to start.
The biggest challenge that entrepreneurs, potential entrepreneurs face,
I think in Africa is not being able to find money.
But you could start.
I mean when we started, we also didn't have all this money.
We didn't have money at all.
But we said, "We're going to do it.
We're going to do it."
We started it.
The next thing is that you must speak.
I mean the challenges we faced with remit...
Sometimes, you're like,
"OK, guys, can we wrap this up?"
Then you say,
"But we've done so much work.
Let's try. Let's try.
Let's push. Let's move forward."
You go here. You borrow money to bring it in.
You borrow from family, from friends.
Really, it is sticking to the business until you reach a point where you realize that you're going to make it.
You make a decision and you say,
"We're not going to make it, let's close shop."
But really, the biggest piece of advice is to start and to stick to the business, and work extremely hard because you're going to work.
You're not going to get paid for a very long time.
Up to today, we don't get paid.
So it's a huge, huge challenge.
The money issue is a problem.
It's a big problem because you have a team of guys who have been working now for almost a year.
If we were sitting down and working on this every single day, we would be much farther.
We have to go and find money, which we can actually bring in to help the company.
We don't take a salary because we don't have money.
Every little money we make, we put back into the company.
Because of that, we also have to actually work on the side to get some money.
It's a challenge, but you just have to push and push and push and push.
You don't give up.
Our final entrepreneur for this week helps us better understand the idea of the entrepreneurial event.
One of the challenges of studying entrepreneurship is the difference in every one's journey.
Some people quit their job and immediately register a new venture, which creates a public record of the founding of the company.
Others work for years, on nights and weekends until they are confident enough about their venture before deciding to quit their job and register the company.
Samir's decision to jump into the entrepreneurial lifestyle seems a very clear cut.
It might not be the same for you.
The second thing to observe about Samir's story is how he transferred knowledge from Kenya to the US and back to Kenya and is constantly trying to absorb new information like a sponge.
When you're offering a specific product, in a specific place, but with different cultures and habits, making false assumptions could kill your venture.
Let's hear more on this from Samir.
My name is Samir Ibrahim. I'm 26.
My background is in finance and international business.
<i>(interviewer) Perfect.
Tell us about your venture.</i>
Our company is called SunCulture.
We design and sell solar-powered irrigation systems that make it cheaper and easier for farmers to grow food.
We got here in May, 2013.
Actually, we got here in October, 2012.
Since then, we have helped hundreds of farmers across Kenya, improved their lives by growing high value fresh fruits and vegetables.
Yes. Since I was a little kid,
I've always wanted to be an entrepreneur.
It's always been in my family.
I always said I'm going to actually come back to the region and do something.
I'd always sold books on the side.
Little ventures on the side while you're young is always fun, sort of like the stereotypical lemonade stand.
It's exciting to have made that move. It's very fulfilling.
My family has always been small business owners and entrepreneurs.
When my co-founder and friend,
Charlie, approached me with this idea, we decided it was the right time to make the jump.
Charlie had started a few companies before.
I was looking for a way to escape the corporate America life that I was living.
It made sense at the time and very happy we did it.
<i>(interviewer) What elements of entrepreneurship</i>
<i>really sort of stood out to you to be attractive in that way?</i>
The way we look at it is that everything great that's ever happened in the world started from someone starting something.
We figure if we wanted to make some impact somehow, somewhere, we had to start something ourselves.
That's the most attractive thing for us is we can shape the way our company works.
We can actually live our dream and live our vision the way we want to.
I don't think anybody knows if they have the right skills to become an entrepreneur.
I don't know if there's a skill set that makes a good entrepreneur, makes a bad entrepreneur.
I think having a mindset where no matter what, you're not going to give up.
That resilience is something that everyone one should have.
I'm not really sure if that's something that you're born with.
It can be developed. I'm not sure.
But it's something that's really important.
I think anybody that wants to be an entrepreneur should try and should keep pushing.
Because if they really believe in something and if you really want to do something for yourself, it's possible.
It's always possible.
You just have to keep crawling through all the obstacles.
And It'll be OK.
<i>(interviewer) I feel like you're playing down a little bit</i>
<i>the kind of skills you do need to have an entrepreneur.</i>
<i>At least we'd like characteristics.</i>
<i>If you were to sort of say like what are the things you need</i>
<i>to be cognizant of, in terms of business and apply it?</i>
Sure. That's a good question.
The money, you need money skills to be an entrepreneur.
If you don't have money skills, find someone who can help you with money skills.
You or your co-founder or somebody in your team has to be able to manage people.
Then you or your co-founder or somebody in your team needs to be able to handle the technical side of whatever you're doing.
Taking a step back, the reason why I think we're so lucky is that Charlie and I come from two separate backgrounds.
We have two very complementary skill sets.
I come from a very finance and international business side of things and Charlie comes from very technical...
- he's a mechanical engineer by training - large scale solar installations.
We have two very defined hard skills that when put together, we can kind of handle everything.
I think that's something really important, and not a lot of entrepreneurs realizes you need people in your team to cover everything.
You don't need to do it yourself, but you need to have people in your team who have the skills necessary to execute what you're trying to do.
When you start a business, you're never prepared for the skills you'll need.
We don't come from agriculture backgrounds.
We know everything about agriculture right now.
It's those things where you have to pick up hard skills along the way.
I think the most important skill that we had to learn along the way is to manage the emotional rollercoaster that we go through on a daily basis.
I think that's something that if I can go back a few years and tell a younger Samir,
"This is something you need to know before you start this is that you're going to have ups and downs on a daily basis.
You need to be able to manage that.
Otherwise, it'll eat you up."
That's actually the most difficult thing.
There have been a lot of challenges we've had to face.
Like I said, the number one challenge in one that you're not always prepared for is how to manage your own psychological state.
Being an entrepreneur is difficult. It's also very fulfilling.
Every decision you make directly impacts the success of your company.
Every decision you make directly affects a lot of other people as well.
There's a lot of stress.
But if you can manage the stress and come to an understanding you're doing this because you love it and remind yourself that sometimes, then it's extremely fulfilling.
That's the most difficult thing.
Learning to manage it better is very helpful.
Yeah.
<i>(interviewer) No other challenges?</i>
There a lot of other challenges.
Starting a company with a new technology in a fairly nascent agricultural market, in a new country for us, comes with lots of challenges.
Dealing with the operation nuances of bringing goods into the port, or understanding tax law, understanding what drives people in different part of the world, understanding how to sell to people in different parts of the world; it's tough.
You can't come to a new country and launch a business with the same mentality that you had when you were back where you were before, we were in New York.
People are different.
What drives people is different.
The way business is done, the formalities, all different.
You have to be very flexible, and very open, and not have too big of a head where you come to a place and think you know everything; because you don't.
You have to be able and willing to learn the new things that come with starting a company in a new country.
That's something that's challenging.
If you allow yourself to sort of you sponge and absorb a lot of information, then you'll be fine.
<i>- Okay, just be a sponge.</i>
- Just be a sponge.
- <i>Easy. You make it sound so easy.</i>
- That will be the tagline.
Nairobi is such a concentrated pool of awesome people.
Working in an environment where there are so many people who are shooting for such amazing goals, it gives us an opportunity to bounce ideas off to people very closely.
The sort of starting community here is very tight.
It makes working here much easier because you can speak to people about the problems you're going through and the challenges that you have.
You always have peers to bounce things off a bit.
It really helps you when you're starting a company.
I hope you found those interviews insightful and inspiring.
In the next few weeks, we'll be talking with more entrepreneurs about their experiences with opportunity identification, understanding their customer, marketing, fundraising, and growing their venture.
Be sure to submit all of your questions to us on Coursera, in the quiz that is provided because we're going to be hosting live Google Hangout panels.
We really want to make sure that your questions get answered with our great panelists.
Thanks very much.
All the information is on the slide.
