Hello, this introductory section of the <i>Éléments de géomatique</i> course talks about the representation, acquisition and management of spatial references data.
Representation. One of the first parameters of representation is the scale.
On the example that is given on this slide you first have a map that gives an overview of a scale of 1:25 000 in this case, we speak of a small scale.
And for 1cm measured on the map we have on this scale
250m in the field.
Or for 1mm, which can be measured with a ruler,
I effectively have 25m in the field.
So this gives us an idea of the scale of objects that can be represented on a map.
If I take a bigger scale like the map, 1:1000 for example here we speak of a large scale.
In this case, 1cm measured on my map is 10m in the field.
Or with my small ruler in mm,
I have an object of one meter.
This much for the scale.
In terms of types of information, we distinguish information say vectorial and information of a raster type.
If I take the example here of an aerial vue of our campus
I will be able to draw some objects on this map typically a roadside, like this, with two lines, or a building whose contour I draw here.
Or I have here a wooded area whose contour I'll also take.
All these are vectorial elements.
For the raster, I'll actually overlap my vue with a regular grid.
I'll draw here some elements of this grid.
Then the raster will be assigned if we want, to each element, to each pixel.
Like here, I have a wooded area, so this would be a pixel that represents the forest.
Here I have a construction element, so here I have a building, in this case here, and then I can find myself in this section here with a lake area in this case here.
So here are the two types of information, vectorial or raster.
In terms of some examples with the vectorial data, here you have some maps that already have the cadastre that we've already seen, with the borders of land, the location of buildings,
You have a national map with the ground cover, the hydrography, the wooden areas, the urbanized areas and you have here an execution plan for construction work, with the round-about here, and the various components of the road.
In terms of raster data, we understand everything that comes from aerial shots, orthophotos that are compatible with the scales of plans and maps, satellite images and likewise a series of maps which has been rasterized, plans like the one one we have here in these examples which are not vectorial plans but which are plans that have been rasterized.
You can see in this example of representation, the national map at different scales.
An interesting effect is the generalization.
You can see on this scale of 1:25000 a mountain road with all the details of the different contours with a certain accuracy. 
If we go on to a scale of 1:50000, we can already see the generalization effect where the switchbacks of these roads are already a little simplified. 
If I now go on to a scale of
1:200000, a much smaller scale, it's clear that the road is not as detailed, but you can still see that it's a mountain road.
In terms of topographique maps, in the national offices, you will find different scales, with a representation of the ground cover like proposed by SwissTopo.
We will stop here with a little quiz to think a little bit about the generalization effect.
The plan, in its representation, the plan offers an exact metric. 
It's used for engineering projects, it's used for cadastre.
We can see the different parcel boundaries in this cadastre example, with the precise documentation of position of bounds and of boundaries.
Likewise we have the buildings, with their footprint, as well as a series of linear objects, diverse objects like stairs and walls.
The scales for this plan go from 1:200 to 1:1000.
The overall plan offers like for the national map a view of the ground cover with this example here in Neuchatâtel the vineyard areas, the urban construction areas.
Likewise you have the communication lines with the highway that passes here as well as the topography with the contour lines that give an idea of the terrain's slope.
Another form of representation is the geo-scheme.
It's an approximative representation of the positioning of objects in space such as for example a network of public transport where you have the different lines, the sequence of stations, with an indication of the approximate geographical position.
What's interesting here is knowing the sequence of stations rather than the exact location in space.
Another form of representation are the thematic maps that come from statistics such as for example, here, the average daily traffic on the highways.
You have here the width of the line that corresponds to traffic density. 
So we can clearly see that in the region of
Valais there's relatively little traffic while in other regions such as 
Zurich or Lausanne there's a high traffic density.
Another form of representation consists of giving statistical values compared to a unit kilometer.
This is the case on this map, where we can see the evolution of built areas.
For every 1km² we have an color index that will indicate the progression of this evolution over time.
Another form of representation are the geo-services or geo-servers which are available on the internet to the different canton offices, of the confederation or of the natinoal geographical institutions. 
You have here an example with the canton of Neuchâtel.
We will present you a short film that allows you to discover a little bit what one of these geo-services is.
The geo-services allow to access geographical informations thanks to internet access.
The first goal of these services is the visualization of data.
For example, for the canton of Neuchâtel, the platform permits to manage the data layers: such as administrations, cultural centers the town plan as well as the cadastral plan.
A set of layers on the same theme can be visualized.
Different themes are proposed for the portal of Neuchâtel.
A first example is the map of the environment of hydrogrqphic data with the zones of water protection and the sites of water streams.
Next we can access the topographic map with the contour lines and the characteristic elements of the terrain, or even the map with invasive plants that gives view of the propagation of plant parasites in Neuchâtel's environment.
Another form of representation are the tridimensional representations like you have here with an example of a laser survey of a natural area of a landslide.
And on the right you have an urban model that's a little bit more complicated with a set of buildings, forests and streams.
Acquisition 
Here we'll see the principles of acquisition with a little example here, of an aerial panoramic vue where here we can see a small area of houses.
So we will first observe the terrain. 
We will then model the different objects.
Here on this aerial shot we can see this area with the different houses, with the roads, with parts of meadows and gardens.
And, with the topometric methods we will measure and then take in-situ the different objects that are the houses, their footprint, the part of the road as well as other objects, like here, the border of the forest.
So we have these principles of acquisition that are illustrated here with this little example.
Among the methods that are already described, we find surveying with the theodolite, with the level, the GPS with the methods of spatial acquisition. 
Photogrammetry which utilizes aerial shots, and the laser scanner which is a new method which permits to record a large number of points on ground's contour and on buildings. 
For the raster techniques we will utilize satellite images with tele-detection, with orthophotos and also with radar which is a technique that permits the measuring of terrain models but also to penetrate the soil and to see the subsoil composition a little bit.
Amongst the methods, surveying, it permits with measurement of angles and distance to return the coordinates of objects.
If I have a small example here with a building and its footprint
I will come with my device, in this case the theodolite, stationed at a point, here, known.
I will use another point to orient my station that allows me to determine here the building's representative points with distance measurements, d1, d2 as well as angle measurements. 
So, on one hand we have the distances and the angles that then permit the determination of plane coordinates, of points of interest in the building.
For the GPS, the principle is similar, namely that it's positioned somewhere on the Earth's surface with a receiver and we will pick up the signals with a series of satellites that fly 20 000 km high and these signals translated into geometry terms, are nothing other than the distances d1, d2, d3 and by crosschecking these distances we can determine the coordinates of the GPS receiver.
Among the methods of acquisition, photogrammetry permits to photograph a portion of the ground.
So if I have my part of the ground, with photogrammetry
I will be able to define my image plan, which would be somewhere in the airplane, that flies over the terrain that interests me.
I will take a shot from a certain altitude.
So I will be able to take a part of the ground.
If I have an object of interest, for example the a little building here and well from the photo I have an impression of the building's image and from the measurements in the image, from the coordinate measurements in the image
I will be able to determine the terrain's coordinates by this photogrammetry principle.
The other method based on the collection of a large number of points is the laser scanner that allows for a very large density of points as we can be seen here in this example.
You have a laser system here that we will place in front of the object that interests us with here a very high velocity scan, where we will be able to collect thousands of points of the building.
You have the building here, which is returned and which is composed of millions of points with a representation there that's quite accurate that then allows to measure, to make cuts in the building, to obtain geometric information.
Finally, the last pillar of this introduction: the management methods.
The most simple management method comprises of introducing the elements acquired on the terrain into an informatics system
We speak of assisted design via computers that we use for construction or for development.
More sophisticated, it's the adding of a data base and of a GIS like we have it here that allows to associate objects with spatial references such as buildings, streams, roads, a database with its structure here that associates the buildings with their addresses and a table here that represents the roads.
We can introduce a certain number of attributes and elements in these databases say a spatial reference.
In summarize this geomatics introduction, we have seen a number of methods and techniques for acquisition management and representation of geo data.
We have seen that natural or constructed objects can be modelled by means of two large classes which are vectors if we want to accurately describe the objects or by means of raster type images where we want to see an overall vue of the territory.
Finally, the information is available on servers geo-portals of public administrations that make a series of geo-data available to the public at large and to professionals.
So I invite you to discover these geo-servers through a quiz that will be suggested during this week.
