The 2nd example I like to use to illustrate implementation research at work is the Community-directed Interventions against health problems, otherwise called CDI.
In this case, the implementation challenge was how to achieve and sustain very high coverage of ivermectin for several years in an area that is endemic with Onchocerciasis.
Given that Onchocerciasis control requires annual treatment of a total population that is at risk, reaching a very high treatment coverage level for several years, as much as 15 years, is a major challenge to the health system.
Experiences have shown that mobile teams have been tried; they have been used to see if such a high coverage could be achieved.
Unfortunately, it was too expensive.
Coverage reach was not satisfactory.
Community-based approaches were introduced, yet coverage was less than satisfactory and the sustainability issue was still a problem.
So Tropical Diseases Research Programme was asked to study all of these community-based approaches and to find the most effective and sustainable method of treatment of light populations over several years.
In 1994, TDR launched a 2 phases multi-country study.
The 1st phase was formative research.
All of the community-based approaches that were designed for communities were studied.
The finding was, community members were not involved.
Community members were mere recipients of the service that was visiting the community.
Their participation was very little.
Most staff only made it to mobilizing members of the community to a central area, where the ivermectin, a drug, was distributed by non governmental organizations or health workers.
So they were passive recipients.
The finding from this formative phase also showed that communities were capable of organizing themselves around complex activities, sharing resources, and delivering services to members of their community.
The findings from this formative phase led to an experimental study; an experimental study of community-directed treatment with ivermectin.
The study, at this experimental stage, compared an approach that is designed by the community itself with another approach that is designed by the program.
The findings from the experimental research concluded that community-directed treatment with ivermectin is feasible and effective.
It's likely to be sustainable.
It can achieve very high coverage.
Correct treatment procedures are capable of being complied with by community members.
The study drew attention, just like we found in home management, to certain key points.
These are:
- Flexibility.
The importance of flexibility at the community operational level was traced in the findings.
The issue of reporting was also mentioned.
You will recall that we discussed, during the home management approach, the issue of reporting, which was a problem.
It was also found that it remained a problem for community distributors to report properly after delivering service to members of their community.
Like we found in home management of malaria, community-directed treatment with ivermectin has since evolved, riding on implementation research all the way.
In 1996, implementation research showed that community-directed intervention strategy was feasible and effective and likely to be sustained.
In 1997, the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control,
APOC, adopted it as a main strategy.
So the resource for the implementation research was grabbed immediately after it came out by APOC.
In 1999, treatment coverage with ivermectin, using this community-directed treatment with ivermectin approach, was noted to be about 2 times higher than conventional methods that had always been used by the health system.
CDDs, that is the Community Directed
Distributors, as the community providers were called, were very much involved in other health interventions, indicating that there was a wide acceptance.
So the community-directed distributors at the community level were very much involved in other activities at the community level.
The excitement led APOC to ask TDR to study the use, further, of CDTi strategy for other interventions with different complexity levels.
So we can see how CDTi evolved to the next stage.
Community-directed intervention could be used for other interventions of different complexities.
The attribute of implementation research to respond to the needs of implementation barriers was clearly demonstrated here.
Let's look at community-directed intervention, briefly, which is the strategy we are talking about; the intervention that was to be applied.
It is a health intervention which is undertaken at the community level under the direction of the community itself.
So communities have a role to play.
The health system has a role to play.
Working together as partners, that's crucial in community-directed intervention.
The steps are shown.
One thing we should note is that community is not a passive recipient of service but a central player to the service being given at the community level and a partner to the implementing agency, like the health system.
In this case, a multi-country study on CDI, implementation research was set out to answer the question: how far will the community-directed intervention approach go where there are multiple health issues?
The study designed in this case takes into consideration the complexity.
We look at complexity in 2 ways.
There is the complexity of the individual interventions, for example CDTi and Vitamin A are taken as very simple, a single commodity given annually, insecticide treated bed nets.
The bed nets are bulky, and there is also the complexity of utilization: home management of malaria and where individual case management was required.
Malaria was, throughout the year introducing a different type of complexity.
Then of course there is DOTS.
In the case of tuberculosis, case detection and referral were complex issues that needed to be looked at as well.
Besides the complexity of the individual interventions, there is also the complexity of the number of interventions that would be managed by the community at the same time.
Different districts were selected for different intervention periods so that by the 3rd year, all the interventions had been added.
Typically, as we found in the home management of malaria, a major element in implementation research is the multi-disciplinary team approach which involves experts.
From affected countries, you have the epidemiologists, the health economists, social behavioral scientists, statisticians, data managers, as you will see in the picture.
For all the interventions, community-directed intervention yielded a higher average than the current approach.
Whether it is malaria, where coverage was twice as high as what was obtained.
The insecticide treated nets, which was twice as high as well.
Vitamin A and the ivermectin coverage was significantly higher, showing that despite the complexity of the interventions and the fact that there were multiple interventions being put together at the same time, it was still highly effective.
Communities, therefore, could handle several interventions at the same time, irrespective of their complexity.
This does not apply to DOTS.
For reasons that there were not so many tuberculosis cases in the villages, there is the issue of stigma that is referral.
With respect to efficiency of community-directed intervention, it was highly cost effective and the health system did not have to bear all the cost because the cost was spread out to other stakeholders, particularly the community.
In order to tease out the critical factors that facilitated and that make that community-directed intervention an elaborate design of a conceptual framework of the CDI process pre-guided the social-behavioral aspect of our research and key elements of our process was developed there.
Looks very complex and takes into consideration lots of issues from the stakeholder process, to the health system dynamics, as well as how communities are engaged, how they are empowered, as well as the engagement of the CDI implementers, right up to the broader health system issues.
As we found in home management of malaria, one critical, facilitating factor for the community-directed intervention, which was reported using the implementation research to tease it out, was the role of the community actors.
Communities shared the burden of implementation with the health system.
So the CDDs took some of the time, quicker too, than the health system would have shouldered.
Shortage of supplies was a hinderance to community-directed intervention.
It was reported, as such.
So, I repeat, it is important that an implementation research identify those factors that we facilitate, on one hand, as well as report those factors that we hinder so that they can be addressed.
There you've seen another design of implementation research to address them or getting the health system just to take note and be aware that they are there as hinderances that need to be addressed.
Implementation research will make recommendations and share these recommendations with policy makers and implementers.
For example, as you will see, in this beautiful photograph, the community-directed intervention team, the team that did this research, used various approaches to disseminate the findings.
The most important approach is to make presentation to the health system.
So policy implementers are always waiting for the results to become available.
This was the case in community-directed intervention that I'm talking about.
The uptake and the scale-up was immediate.
Another advantage of implementation research is that the tools, the manuals, and communication materials that are used during the implementation research when refined become easy to use by the health system, like monitoring tools, like evaluation tools.
I will invite you to visit WHO website, download, and watch community-directed treatment with ivermectin video.
You will like it.
In this chapter, describing what implementation research really is, we discussed 2 approaches to implementation research.
The home management studies, which use the sequential implementation research approach, and the multi-country studies, which was done in 2 phases, the formative and the experimental.
Both of them have all the elements of implementation research, which is irrespective of the approach that one uses, whether sequential, like in the case of home management of malaria, or multi-country, like in the case of community-directed intervention.
Implementation research is used to resolve hinderances to the use of efficacious interventions against health problems.
Thank you very much, and goodbye.
