This is Module 3 of the 5 modules of the massive open online course on Implementation Research, developed by
 the Special Programme for Research and Training
 in Tropical Diseases.
 This module outlines the design
 of implementation strategies.
 Hello, my name is Pascale Allotey, Professor of Public Health,
 head of Global Public Health  and Associate Director
 of the South East Asia Community Observatory
 at the Monash University campus  in Malaysia.
If this is your first visit  to this site, a very warm welcome,
 and I would strongly encourage you  to browse through the first two modules
 that introduce  implementation research
 and provide an overview of how to address
 different contexts in which  implementation research projects
 can be designed and undertaken.
 In this 3rd module on designing implementation research strategies,
Professor Maria Rosário O. Martins will take you through how to identify  and specify implementation strategies.
In other words, given  a range of possible options, how do you decide which is the best strategy
for the particular health problem and intervention  with which you are faced?
Working with Dr. Neal Alexander
 and Dr. Jorge Arroz
 Maria and her team will systematically take you through
the process of identifying approaches through an understanding  of the context,
 through an exploration of existing literature,
 including how to assess the quality of the evidence
 and through an assessment of the suite
 of methods you have  at your disposal.
They present a case study from ongoing work
in prevention of malaria  in Mozambique, which brings the concepts to life
and provides a concrete example to guide your understanding of the concepts.
To recap briefly, in Module 1, we explained the role of implementation research in addressing the challenge
 of getting efficacious interventions to those to need it.
Implementation research does this
through the identification of the barriers and in the development and testing
 of strategies to overcome these barriers.
Module 2 took you through the challenges
 of understanding and working with a diverse context
 that have an impact on implementation.
We address, for instance, why an intervention  would work in one context
 and not in another,
 making context, therefore,
 a critical component of implementation.
This 3rd module focuses on how to design implementation strategies and the research approaches required to ensure robust evidence to justify the implementation approach.
The module is divided into 3 sections.
Chapters 1 and 2 are presented by Maria.
In Chapter 1, she defines an implementation strategy.
 In Chapter 2, she takes you through the approaches
 for justification  of your research strategy,
 and in Chapter 3, Neal will walk you through
the appropriate research design to ensure the robustness of the evidence generated by your implementation research.
 The module culminates in a case study
 of a project in Mozambique  called Native by Jorge.
By the end of the module, you'll be able to identify different types
of implementation strategies, specify the different type of implementation strategies,
 and use these concepts in real life examples
 to choose an appropriate implementation design
related to diseases of poverty and other types of public health research priorities.
The module includes a list of recommended readings, some exercises to ensure formative assessment, and points for discussion.
 Best of luck, and enjoy the module.
