Welcome back to the course.
I'm Neal Alexander
I'm based at CIDEIM in Cali in Colombia.
The next 2 chapters, this one and the next one, are about how to choose a suitable implementation research design.
This chapter is about how to specify your research question in connection with the objective and how to use it to specifically address a given health related problem.
Then, once you've specified your research question, the next chapter is about how to use it to develop a research design.
So, what is a research question and why does it matter?
Well, it's a way of specifying what it is that you want to have learnt by the end of the research.
It's the next step in the evidence-based approach after you've identified a health related problem.
It's a way to help select between the wide range of qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods that can be used in implementation research.
You can have different types of research questions depending on the type of objective.
Suppose the objective is explanatory:
For example, you might have a cervical screening strategy that isn't reaching all the women who might benefit and you want to find out what's stopping it from doing so.
Then, you might want to describe a situation that you know about:
For example, how health teams manage to provide HIV/AIDS treatment to those who need it.
You might want to influence something through an intervention:
For example, a package of health insurance benefits.
You might want to know what kind of effect that package has on access to hospital services.
You might want to explain a bit like describe but more analytic:
For example, understand how community empowerment can lead to improved sanitation.
Finally, you might want to predict, meaning thinking of changes into the future not necessarily predicting in the physical sense:
For example, you might want to know how to expand use of bed nets to such an extent that malaria transmission is prevented.
To try to develop specific research questions we identify the key elements and one way to do that is via the PICO scheme.
The 'P' is for population, which, in implementation research, means the stakeholders in the implementation strategy.
'I' is for the intervention, or implementation strategy itself... what does that consist of?
'C' is for control or comparison
What's the alternative to the implementation strategy?
Finally, 'O' is for the outcome.
What do we hope the implementation strategy is going to improve?
For most of the rest of this chapter, we're going to take an example implementation research question, break it down, then make the parts more specific aiming to refine the question and make it more useful in guiding the design.
This particular research question relates to dengue.
In the photo here there's a discarded car tire which is something that can easily collect rainwater and become a breeding site for Aedes mosquitoes.
The question is how can a local health department effectively target breeding sites of mosquitoes which transmit dengue?
We're going to break it down and see what it contains in terms of the PICO elements.
Here's the question again.
What does it say about the 'P' for population or stakeholders?
Well, first, although the intervention is ultimately aimed at reducing dengue incidents in the population, here we're interested in implementation.
So, the who, the 'P' in the PICO, the population or stakeholders, refers to those who are managing and carrying out the intervention.
Are they mentioned in the current version of the question?
Well, no, they're not, but who do you think they could be?
Well, they're likely to be some combination of public servants like health service or sanitation workers and the general public if, for example, the strategy involves mass media messages aimed at cleaning up discarded containers which could hold rainwater.
Here's the question again. What about the 'I' for intervention or implementation strategy?
What does the question say about that?
It does say something.
It says it's  about targeting mosquito breeding sites but it's very general.
We might try to say something about some or all of the following components: justification, why we're doing this, action and action targets, temporality or time, and dose or how much.
This is following the paper by Proctor and others whose scheme also contains components covered under the 'P' and 'O' of PICO.
Following up those components, in terms of justification, prior work found that controlled measures were subject to limitations such as lack of training and high turnover of personnel and concentration on national guidelines over local conditions.
Action and action targets therefore included training of sanitation technicians and other personnel and identifying the key breeding sites and targeting them.
Storm drains, rather than domestic containers were found to be dominant and they were targeted with pyriproxyfen which is an insect growth regulator.
So, now we're on to 'C' for control or comparison.
What does the question say about that?
Well, no, it doesn't really say anything about what the intervention will be compared with.
We'll come back to this briefly in the next chapter but you might consider doing a trial, which would give you a nearby control group at the same time, or, a before/after comparison.
Finally, what about the 'O' for outcome?
What does the question tell us about that as it stands?
Well, the question mentions effectively targeting breeding sites.
In terms of implementation research, we might consider the following aspects: acceptability, adoption, whether people actually follow the strategy, appropriateness, feasibility, fidelity, meaning, for example, are the key breeding sites being correctly identified?
Cost of the implementation: is the new strategy more expensive?
Penetration, which could mean whether the key breeding sites are actually being treated with pyriproxyfen.
Finally, sustainability.
So, a refined question might be as follows: 
This version has got more about the 'P' for population or stakeholders, the 'I' for intervention or the implementation strategy itself, and the 'O' for outcome, and we'll see a bit more about the 'C' for control or comparison in the next chapter.
That's the end of this chapter closing on this quote which says that in implementation research, as in other fields, the research question is king.
We've got an additional video, an interview with the vector-born disease coordinator in the town where that dengue vector study was done, and I'll be back in the next chapter.
