Hello
Welcome
My name is Jorge Arroz and I'm a medical doctor with a Masters degree in Public Health.
And actually I'm a PhD student in International Health at the Institute of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in Lisbon, Portugal.
I'm also the Malaria Project Senior
Technical Manager at World Vision Mozambique.
Let's give an overview of what we are going  to cover today.
First, I'll present an introduction of the problem related to bed nets delivery in Mozambique.
Then, the study will be described together with the objectives and the research question.
Finally, we will cover the different phases of the project implementation and we will present some results from the pilot study.
Let's begin by presenting the problem in Mozambique.
Malaria is considered the most important public health problem in the country with 35% of children aged under five years testing positive for malaria parasites in 2011.
Moreover in 2014
National Malaria Control Programme reported up to
5.8 million cases of malaria with up to
3.2 thousand deaths related to it.
Now, getting back to bed net distribution mass campaigns for universal coverage,
3 main challenges were identified.
The first one is related to household registration process.
So, in order to plan and quantify the amount of bed nets it's important to do a registration of all the households.
This process is conducted by local volunteers and they have to go house by house to register the household members.
The registration form was too complex because the recorders had to collect information on the names, age, and gender of all household members.
Also, the risk of having a double registration was high because houses were not marked
On the other side, for the same reason sometimes we missed registering some houses.
Another complexity was related to the time that people had to wait to receive the bed nets without any kind of assurance that they will in fact receive the bed nets.
The second challenge was related to the criteria to distribute bed nets per each household.
The number of bed nets for each household depends on many parameters: sleeping patterns, age, and gender. This process is time consuming and sometimes difficult to put into practice.
Finally there were long queues to receive the bed nets.
The main reason for these queues is related to the fact that the names had to be confirmed in the registration list and sometimes the names were not in that particular list
More specifically the objective of this study is to compare bed net coverage by households before and after the intervention.
So what is the research question?
The research question in this study is the following:
Is bed net coverage by households changing after the invention?
Hello!
Welcome again!
We're going to have an interview with doctor Jorge Arroz, who's in charge of the new pattern of distribution of bed nets in Mozambique.
Hello Jorge
Hello, professor Maria do Rosário
It's a great pleasure to be here,
[to speak] about a study that took place in Mozambique.
Right
We're now going to start by describing the precise context of the study.
Well, the study was done in Mozambique in the central region, a region where there is a high occurrence of malaria as well as in two other provinces where malaria is widespread, the context is fairly rural, and where availability of health care is not very good.
Access to health care providers is not easy, and the people, the population have to travel huge distances to have access to very basic health services.
Right. Let's now go to the next phase.
I imagine that before these new measures were implemented what's called an analysis of the situation was done with various actors and that some conclusions were reached?
I'd like you to tell us a little about this and what were the main problems faced in the course of this analysis.
Well, an analysis of the situation was done including various actors, the Ministry of Health, its representatives at the level of the provinces and  districts.
Besides these actors, health-care partners were involved, non-governmental organisations one of which I belong to,
Care Vision International, and there also was the involvement of the community leaders, of  the community structures, as actors that participated actively in the process of distribution of bed nets.
-Right. So what were the main conclusions you have reached?
-During this analysis of the situation, three main conclusions clearly appeared.
The first being related to the process of registering the members of a household.
One of the main steps is to register all families that live in a given area, and we saw that this process was much too complex with registrations forms filled with information on the members of  the household, for example the name of each member of the household, with age and gender.
This made things a little more difficult and would make the process of registration more complex.
Another point linked to the process of registration was the possibility of double registration of the houses, as they were not marked and the possibility of a house not being registered.
Also, the second important aspect of this situation analysis was linked to the process of attribution of the bed nets to the families, which was complex.
A fairly complex form of attribution of bed nets was needed and we ended up having to evaluate the distribution itself, and we reached the conclusion that the people had to queue up for a very long time waiting to receive a bed net.
So, the questions of the registration, of the households members, and the long waiting queues and the criteria for the attribution of the bed nets are the three key aspects that stood out as a result of the analysis of situation.
So I imagine that for this process to be implemented, there were various phases?
I'd like you to tell us a little about those phases that unfolded so that in the end, the new strategies were implemented.
-The distribution process of nets has its various phases, and for the first phase, it was necessary for the health-care authorities to   have the required competence, therefore for the team, at the district level to be trained.
Sometimes, these people, after receiving training, would themselves train other persons at the district level in order to strengthen, and increase the district team, also involving the community leaders.
They were selected for a specific locality, region or neighborhood, and volunteers worked on this process of registration of members of  households.
It was important for these people to be members of the community, as they are be better accepted, by the members of households, who open  the doors to their houses more easily and trust them more.
And these recorders, as we call people in charge of the registration, are also given training.
They are given the forms, receipts and stickers. in order to identify the houses that have been registered.
The receipts guarantee that the families will finally go where the distribution is to take place and receive the due number of bed nets.
This information, having been collected and the date of distribution having been set, the distribution points being as close as possible to the given community, the families get there with the receipts and are given the bed nets.
So, in general, these are the phases of the process of distribution in the new pattern.
From what I can see, there are three innovations in this new pattern, aren't there?
To start,  the process of attribution of a set number of nets per family was simplified, then the introduction of vouchers that enable a better identification of the families when they claim the nets they are entitled to and allow those huge waiting queues to be avoided, and we can add that the fact that there are stickers has reduced the amount of over information or lack or information on the families. Would you agree?
Right. And to my mind, the first very important aspect was the simplification of the methodology leading to the attribution of the bed nets which basically is, nowadays, a bed net for every two people.
In fact, the receipts, which are vouchers allow the families to have a form of document they can easily take to the distribution point and easily be identified as already registered.
And to finish, the stickers have in fact enabled the avoidance of double registration of the members of households as they indicated which houses had been registered and also if a house didn't have a sticker to it, it implied it had not been registered and the supervision team that monitors the registration would spot the house and send a team of recorders to that community and to those houses to make the registration.
Very well. You have spoken about these three innovations,
The people that are watching us are probably curious to know what the vouchers were like and would like to know more about this new technique of distribution.
Can you give [a] detailed explanation?
What was the format of the vouchers, what information did they carry, between the old method, that was more complex, with a more complex pattern of distribution of nets to the families and now your new simpler method?
Let's have a little more explanation, it's important as these concern the strategies, the most important points in your study.
That's right. So the voucher was made of two parts: the left part, was a stub that was kept by the recorder and the team involved in the process of distribution, and the right part, was the receipt of the voucher given to the family and gave basic information on where the family lived, the area where it was located, the number of members living in the household which is very important as the first change was the formula to enable the attribution of a bed net to each household and basically, the formula was the number of members of the household divided by two, and rounded up to an even number.
-This is the new formula? -This is the new formula.
And was the old one like?
The old formula would, after gathering information on the age, gender and number of members of a household attempt to establish patterns of sleeping habits, such as, for example, in one family where there were three members in the household, it was possible to receive one, two or three bed nets.
For example, in the old model of distribution a family with a father, a  mother and a two-year-old child would receive one bed net, because they were supposed to all sleep together.
But, if in this family the child was already ten years old, they were to receive two bed nets because the father and the mother were to sleep together and then the child was to sleep on his own.
However, if that family were to be composed of a father, a grand-father and of a twenty-year-old child, as it's not possible to have the father share his bed with the grand-father or the twenty-year old son, they had to receive three bed nets.
There were three situations, three possibilities for attribution of bed nets, for the same household composition.
This is what has changed in the new system. where the number of members of a household is simply divided by two, the goal being one bed net for two people.
So, it must be simpler...
-Much simpler. -For those who have to calculate there are fewer parameters.
Besides the receipts, there were stickers.
The stickers gave basic information as the location of the neighborhood, the community, and that the house had been registered.
And you would stick it on the main door of the house of the hut, to my mind, in this context it's more a hut, seeing the rural context of the communities where we worked and tested the new pattern.
However, when the supervisors checking the registrations would arrive at a community and see houses without stickers, they would by principle deduce that the house had not been registered.
It made it easier to send a more specific team to the community to register those families.
Thank you very much.
So now that we have talked about these new strategies, we've been allowed to talk about what will follow the study.
We have already spoken about the investigation, and now for those taking part in the investigation, there are more years of studies, aren't there?
Could you talk about what will follow the study?
Well, the present study is  made of a mix of methodology with a qualitative component and a quantitative one.
The qualitative component: in each of the phases of the process of distribution of bed nets, there was a focal discussion group with the key actors of that phase.
The goal was to try to gather as much information on what had happened during that phase, or during all the phases, the pros and cons of each step to better adjust the interventions.
Already, in the quantitative component the study was a quasi- experimental study in which we had a district that was a district of intervention in which the new pattern of distribution was followed that is, a bed net for every two persons, the use of vouchers, the use of stickers for the identification of the houses.
Meanwhile there was the control group, the district of control, which had had a previous intervention. with those complex criteria of registration of attribution of a bed net to each member of a household.
We tried as best as we could to obtain something comparable from one district to another in terms of rural characteristics and even in terms of people who had benefited or who wanted to receive a bed net.
Right. I have a question for you, in this qualitative study, in the qualitative part, you said there were focal groups, with the key actors and they made conclusions.
Was the process changed in order to take into account what the comments had been?
Do you have an example?
It was noted that the physical quality of the vouchers that had been made was not adapted and resistant, taking into account where the family was going to store the vouchers.
The study there is finished but in another district that was being used as a pilot too, we were able to better a little the quality of the receipts, and vouchers and this was one of the lessons we quickly managed to grasp with something positive for the implementation, with somewhat of a success in the other district of intervention.
Very well. We're about to finish.
Now, the fundamental question: we have already defined the strategies, we have already defined the aim of the investigation, and now, we don't know, so we need to test, to see if we get results.
We have already spoken about what has been done, the pilot study.
And what were the main conclusions you've reached?
First, in terms of variants for the measure of the results, of the study, of the implementation, we  used, first the percentage of bed nets that were distributed compared to what had been planned, and then the coverage of bed nets in the households, therefore in the families.
And what we observed as the result of the implementation of the research was that after five days, with the first results, the percentage of bed nets distributed using the new pattern of distribution, was greater than the one obtained with the previous pattern.
With the new pattern, we reached 88%, while we had reached 77% with the previous pattern.
And you saw this difference as meaningful, didn't you?
This difference was statistically meaningful. That's correct.
As far as the coverage of households is concerned, of bed nets in the households, again after five days which is the number of days necessary for the distribution of the bed nets there was a difference between the groups, the district of implementation with the new pattern compared to a district using the previous pattern.
With the new pattern of implementation, the coverage was larger,
80 percent, around 81 percent compared to coverage in the district where the old pattern was used which was 73 percent.
And this difference too was....
It too was statistically significant.
Yes, I still have a question for you: when did the study take place, as for us it's important to know when it took place.
Well... the study took place last year, in 2015, from October to December in 2015.
The results were already available in January, for a more exhaustive, careful analysis, to follow with new steps.
That's true. So, what are the next steps?
With these results, we have already had a process of socialization with the Health Ministry, with various actors active in the process of distribution, from both the provinces and the districts involved, and this new strategy was adopted by the Health Ministry, in view of a massive distribution of bed nets at the national level.
A first phase will take place on a large scale in one of the provinces of North Mozambique more precisely in the province of Nampula, which is planned for this year, in 2016.
Very well. So, I want to thank everybody for being with us today.
We're  going to close this cycle of MOOC Module number 3,
I hope you've enjoyed it, and see you soon.
