Welcome to CIME's lectures on transmission electron microscopy for materials science.
The coming lecturers are dedicated to the basics of electron diffraction.
In them, we will develop a generally applicable framework for understanding and interpreting electron diffraction, through the introduction of the Ewald sphere and the reciprocal lattice.
Well, essentially these form a geometrical construct rather than giving a precise description of the underlying physics of diffraction, we shall see that this construct still provides many insights into the phenomena of electron diffraction in a simple and intuitive way.
Before we begin on this construct, in this first lecture on electron diffraction, we will concentrate on the 2-beam electron diffraction condition.
In this video recorded at the microscope, we will look at electron diffraction from a silicon crystal.
At the beginning of the video now we are just looking at a vacuum.
And we're going to introduce a selected area aperture and take the diffraction pattern from that vacuum.
Here is the selected area aperture.
As explained in the earlier lectures by Cecile Hebert, this aperture is in the image plane and we use it to select the region of interest of our sample, from which we will make a diffraction pattern.
In this case, from the vacuum.
Now we go to diffraction mode.
This is done by changing the strength of the intermediate lens system such that the back focal plane is projected onto our screen.
Now we see that we have a single bright spot.
This is because we have an incident beam made of parallel rays which in the back focal plane, are being focused to one spot by the objective lens.
We can call this spot the direct beam.
Now I'm going to leave diffraction mode, go back to image mode, take out that selected area aperture and then just move the sample until we're looking at some silicon crystal.
Here we are moving across the crystal and choosing a region of interest.
We're going to re-insert the selected area aperture as so and once again go to diffraction mode.
At first we see various bright spots each associated with a particular diffracting plane.
However, we're not at a very specific orientation of the crystal sample with respect to the electron beam.
But with the microscope's goniometer, we will now tilt that sample towards a specific orientation.
One where the silicon crystal will be aligned such that its 001 lattice vector is parallel to the electron beam.
As the sample is tilting, we see that different diffraction spots, which are sometimes called reflections, become brighter or weaker in intensity.
Their intensity varies depending on the sample orientation.
Now we've become aligned on that 001 orientation, what is referred to as the zone axis of the diffraction pattern, where we now see a lot of intensity in many different diffraction spots and a high symmetry in their pattern.
Now we're tilting away from that zone axis condition to try and find another diffraction condition, what we will call the 2-beam electron diffraction condition.
So, we're already starting to get there.
We can see that two of the diffraction spots are becoming brighter and brighter in intensity and the rest weaker and weaker.
It takes some refining to get there.
So a bit more sample tilt until we attain a good 2-beam condition.
Almost there. And here we are at that 2-beam condition.
By adjusting the contrast and brightness of the display of the diffraction pattern, we see that in this 2-beam condition we now have two very bright diffraction spots.
All the other diffraction spots have become very weak in intensity compared to these two.
To look at this case of 2-beam electron diffraction, we will look once again at the Bragg diffraction geometry.
Here we have a crystal with planes and the planes are separated by spacing dhkl where hkl are other mirror indices of the plane.
And we're going to consider an incident ray coming into the first plane at an angle Theta.
And then that ray will be reflected from that plane at the same angle Theta.
Now we are going to consider another parallel ray reflecting from the plane below.
So again, coming in at angle Theta and being reflected by this angle Theta.
Now because we have an incident plane wave, we know that the waves on these two rays will arrive in phase with each other.
However, we can also see that the bottom ray travels a further path difference.
So you're marking an orthogonal here, and an orthogonal here.
We can see that there's an extra path difference of the bottom ray compared to the top ray.
Now if we magnify in on this region here as so, and look at that extra path difference, we can see that by trigonometry here we have an angle Theta.
This distance here is dhkl.
This is a perpendicular hence this little bit of path difference here is equal to dhkl times sin Theta.
This extra path difference will be the same d sin Theta.
So, the total extra path traveled by the bottom ray equals 2d sin Theta where I'm using d as a shorthand for dhkl.
And we know that if this extra path difference
2d sin Theta equals a whole number of wavelengths, we will have constructive interference and hence Bragg diffraction.
Where here Lambda is the wavelength of the electron and N is an integer.
So, in the previous slide, we considered Bragg diffraction for a symmetrical case.
In a non-symmetrical case such as here where the atoms in the lower plane are laterally displaced from those in the upper plane.
Where the path differences now marked on as so.
We still obtain the same Bragg equation and Lambda equals 2d sin Theta.
One thing that's helpful with this formula is that we can rewrite it and say that, plane spacing for dnhnknl equals the plane spacing of dhkl divided by N. This allows us to rewrite that equation there as
Lambda equals 2dnhnknl sin Theta.
Doing this allows us to remove the N from the expression in later slides.
Now, I said earlier that this diagram here corresponds to the x-ray case.
One reason for this is that in typical x-ray spectrometers, we have the incident beam is produced at an incident angle rather like this.
And we have the detector over here.
Now in the TEM, instead the incident beam will come down the optic axis from the electron gun.
So, in the next slide, we're just going to look at the TEM case, by turning this diagram on its side.
But before we do that,
I'm going to introduce the wave function and the wave vector to help us interpret diffraction more accurately.
The electron wave can be described by a wave function Psi, where equals Psi, Psi zero times the exponential of minus 2 pie ik.r.
Where in this expression,
Psi zero is the amplitude of the wave,
K is the wave vector and r is the position.
And between them, two pie ik.r gives a face term in function of position.
Here we described just a position dependent wave function ignoring the time dependency term.
Now we're going to look at this wave vector a bit closer.
This wave function I've written is for an incident plane parallel wave, Psi.
And its direction can be described by a wave vector K. You can mark on this vector here K is the wave vector and its modulus equals one over Lambda, where lambda is the wavelength of the electron.
On this slide, I have redrawn the Bragg diffraction schematic for the TEM geometry.
So now the incident rays are coming vertically down as they come down the optic axis of the column.
The Bragg effecting planes are inclined to a small angle
Theta relative to these incident rays.
When there is Brag diffraction, those rays are scattered at the same angle Theta.
I am now going to redraw that diagram in terms of the wave vectors for the incident beam, ki, and for the diffracted beam kd.
So, we start off with the wave vector for the incident electron beam.
K_i, and then put in the wave vector for the diffracted electron beam k_d.
Now, because we are considering elastic scattering, there is no change in energy during this scattering event.
Because of this, the modulus of K_i which equals one over Lambda, equals the modulus of k_d.
On the other hand, there is a change in momentum during the whole scattering event.
So, if first of all we consider the incident wave vector carrying straight on, the difference between these two wave vectors, represents that change in momentum.
And we can add in an extra vector here to represent that change in momentum, which I'm going to call K. We can now see the wave vector for the diffracted been k_d equals K_i plus this K, where that K represents the change in momentum.
Equally, we can say that K equals k_d minus K_i.
On this slide, I'm going to develop the wave vector diagram a bit further.
So, to recap, we have the wave vector K_i, the incident beam, which carry straight on here.
Here we have a plane scattering incident beam at the Bragg angle Theta, generating another beam, with the way wave vector k_d.
And that diffraction can be described by this extra vector that we introduced, which we called K. Now, if we look at the length of that wave vector of K. If we draw on a perpendicular here, we can see that half of the length of that vector is clearly going to be the modulus of K times sine Theta.
So, that means that modulus of this big K overall will equal two times the modulus of K, the general weight factor, times sine Theta.
And we're going to compare this expression now to the Bragg equation.
So, the simplified Bragg equation, which we had developed earlier was Lambda equals 2d_hkl sine Theta.
Now, if we look again at this expression for K, the diffraction vector, we have modulus of K equals two times the modulus of the wave factor.
The modulus of the wave vector was one over Lambda.
So, this is going two over Lambda times sine Theta.
From the Bragg equation we can see that two over
Lambda sine Theta simply equals one over d_hkl.
So, this equals one over d_hkl.
In other words, the length of this vector is the reciprocal of the plane spacing that's doing the diffraction.
So, we can easily see that Bragg equation in this diagram.
Out of this, we're going to describe that vector as the diffraction vector g_hkl.
K equals g_hkl, where the modulus of that g_hkl equals one divided by the plane spacing.
So, we have a reciprocal relationship.
So, how does this Bragg's scattering look like in a real experimental case in the electron microscope.
So, here is our schematic diagram, where now not only have I marked in the wave vector for the incident beam, the wave vector for the diffracted beam, but also I've symbolically included spots here, for what we'd see in the diffraction pattern.
So, a spot for the incident beam, which we'd call 000.
And then another spot, that you see in the diffraction pattern, for the diffracted beam, described by the diffraction vector g_hkl.
And the two of them are separated by an angle two Theta.
Now, in this condition as we've already said, we have inclined to sample such that there is one plane hkl, which is in a strong scattering condition.
And when we had done that, indeed we do obtain two bright diffraction spots in the diffraction pattern.
When we're in this condition, we can also apply a small angle approximation.
From the Bragg equation we know that,
Lambda equals 2d sine Theta.
And because the wavelength of the first electron beam is very small, we know that Lambda is much less than d, since sine Theta equals Lambda over 2d.
And Lambda is much smaller than d, this means that sine Theta is approximately equal to Theta.
By doing this, we can rewrite the Bragg equation as Theta.
Our scattering angle, is approximately equal to Lambda over 2d_hkl.
What we see in this, is firstly a reciprocal relationship.
That in other words, the smaller the plane spacing, the larger the scattering angle we will obtain.
Also, we see that in the small angle approximation, we have a linearity of scattering angle with the reciprocal of the plane spacing.
And this is very useful because it means that we can measure our electron diffraction patterns in a simple linear way, to obtain reciprocal plane spaces.
To summarize on this lecture on 2-beam electron diffraction, we have seen that by inclining a crystal in the electron microscope.
Such that, it has one plane hkl, at the perfect Bragg angle relative to the incident beam.
We will have strong scattering from that plane giving a bright diffraction spot in the electron diffraction pattern.