Welcome to lectures on transmission electron microscopy and the lecture on the Ewald sphere.
In the last lecture, I introduced the concept of the reciprocal lattice, a lattice of nodes in reciprocal space where each node corresponds to a possible diffraction vector from a plane with [INAUDIBLE] indices HKL.
This reciprocal lattice forms the first half of our framework for understanding and interpreting electron diffraction.
In this lecture, I'm going to introduce the second half of the framework, namely, the eval sphere.
To understand the Ewald sphere, we're going to consider that electron diffraction corresponds to elastic scattering.
The incident electron beam is effected by the of the sample.
And during this diffraction event, there is no energy loss.
Therefore, at the scattering event, the energy of the electron beam and hence its wave length, both remain constant.
However, as we have already seen, there is a momentum change during the fraction.
We can describe this on a wave vector diagram.
So here, I have a wave vector for the incident electron beam kI.
Whereas, we have previously seen the length of kI is modulus
= 1 over lambda, the wave length of the electron beam.
I'm going to say that here,
I have some diffraction event.
Now, the scattering from this event could occur in one of many different directions.
So, for instance, we could have a diffracted wave vector here.
Equally, we could have diffraction in this direction, or this direction, or one of many different possible directions.
Now, while the angular scattering may change, of course, the length of these diffracted beam wave edges cannot change.
They all have the same length as that of the incident electron beam, 1 over lambda.
So looking just at this plane of scattering, we can see that all these different possible scattering wave vectors will inscribe a circle.
That's just looking at one plane.
However, we could also have diffraction out of plane.
And if you consider the out of plane scattering wave vectors, we can see that together, they will inscribe a sphere.
And the sphere of possible diffracted beam wave vectors is called the Ewald sphere.
Since the radius of the Ewald sphere has a length of 1 over lambda, we can see that the Ewald sphere has reciprocal dimensions.
And we're now going to interact this sphere with the reciprocal lattice.
To look at this interaction, on this slide,
I have drawn both the Ewald sphere and a reciprocal lattice.
Looking first at the Edward sphere, again, here, we have the wave vector for the incidence electron beam kI.
If there is no scattering, then the wave vector carries straight on, here.
We know that in the back focal order fraction plane, that the incident electron beam is a direct beam in the refraction pattern 000.
000 also forms the origin of this reciprocal lattice.
So I have also placed this origin at the end of the wave vector for incident electron beam.
Now, if we look at the interaction of the
Ewald sphere with the reciprocal lattice, we can see that here, there is a node in the reciprocal lattice that is intersected exactly by the surface of this Ewald sphere.
Now, for this node, we can draw in a wave vector for the diffracted beam, kD.
And since I am saying that this is the wave vector for the diffracted beam, I can also draw in here the diffracted vector g for this particular reciprocal lattice node.
Now, we're going to look at the geometry of this scattering for that particular reciprocal lattice node.
First of all, we're going to look at the angle of scattering.
And I'll say that the semi-angle of scattering is theta.
From this diagram and by trigonometry, it's clear that the modulus of g, the diffraction beta, divided by 2 = modulus of kD times sine theta.
Now we know that g, the diffraction beta equals D star hkl.
Therefore, the modulus of g equals the modulus of D star equals 1 over D.
So, you can see that this becomes
1 over 2 dhkl = the length of kD =
1 over lambda times sine theta.
And this expression should look very familiar to you, because if we rearrange it, we obtain lambda = 2dhkl sine theta.
In other words, we have obtained the Bragg equation by theta = theta B, the Bragg angle.
Thus, we see that when the Ewald sphere intersects exactly through a reciprocal lattice node, the plane corresponding to that reciprocal lattice node is at the exact Bragg condition, and so will diffract strongly.
Cleaning up that diagram, we can represent this scattering as follows.
So we have the incident wave vector kI.
Here, I have drawn in some Bragg planes at the angle theta b relative to kI, scattering at the Bragg angle, leading to diffraction for a plane corresponding to that reciprocal lattice node.
In this representation,
I have had to make an exaggeration to make the representation compact.
Specifically, We know that the electron wave length lambda is much smaller than in the typical plane spacing dhkl.
Because of that, the length of this wave vector k,
Is going to be much greater than the typical reciprocal lattice spacing, d star hkl.
So the radius of this sphere for a realistic representation must be much, much greater.
Moving on with that, I make that realistic representation of the Ewald sphere and the reciprocal lattice in this diagram here.
Here, we have the incident wave vector kI, the diffracted beam wave vector kD, and I have drawn them assuming that we have 200 keV electrons.
With 200 keV electrons, the wavelength lambda is approximately = 2.5 pm.
To complete the illustration,
I have taken a reciprocal lattice for body-centered cubic phase of iron.
This particular node here is once again at the Bragg angle, and this node is for the 020 plane.
And for BCC iron, d020 is approximately = 0.14 nm.
The net result is that the length of k, the wave vector, is approximately 50 times greater than the reciprocal lattice facing d star.
When we draw that in with this very long radius, we can see that the surface of the Ewald sphere is almost flat.
And while this reciprocal lattice is still inclined relative to the incident electron beam, the angle of that inclination is very, very small.
As an exercise, you can calculate that angle of inclination.
And the Bragg angle of theta b and the scattering angle 2 theta b, for this case of 200 keV electrons and
BCC Iron when exciting this
020 reciprocal lattice note.
To summarize,
I have introduced the Ewald sphere, a sphere in reciprocal space, so the radius of k = 1 over lambda.
And we have seen that when we interact this sphere with the reciprocal lattice, and when servers of that sphere intersect exactly through the middle of a reciprocal lattice node, the plane corresponding to that node is at the exact Bragg condition, and so will diffract strongly.
So far, we have only looked at this in the case of two beam electron diffraction.
Where only one of the reciprocal lattice nodes is intersected by the Ewald sphere, and hence, we only have strong refraction on one plane.
Giving a diffraction pattern such as this, where, in this case, the 200 plane is excited strongly giving an intense diffraction spot.
In this case, that plane is inclined at an angle, theta B, relative to the instant electron beam.
However, in electron diffraction, we can have another scenario.
Where instead of the instant electron beam being in inclined relative to a particular crystal plane, it is in fact parallel to many different crystal planes at the same time with the e beam aligned on a low end axis of the crystalline sample.
And in this case, we obtained strong diffraction on many different planes, giving a diffraction pattern with many bright spots, so called multibeam electron diffraction.
And that's what we will look at in the next lecture.