Welcome to the first chapter of module 4 where we are looking at implementation research outcomes.
For this chapter we are going to focus on making a distinction between intervention efficacy, intervention effectiveness and implementation effectiveness.
The chapter has been divided into two sections.
So in the first section we try to find out why implementation effectiveness is not the same thing as intervention effectiveness or intervention efficacy.
And then in the second chapter, we are going to be defining implementation research outcomes.
And we’re going to be conceptualizing them as intermediate outcomes of population health outcomes or individual health outcomes like morbidity and mortality.
Before we go on,  I would like you to take a short quiz to kind of gain our knowledge of the concept that we'll be presenting today.
If you may, these are some of the key messages that we would like you to take with you at the end of this chapter.
So, the first question asks if implementation effectiveness could be defined as the impact of an intervention under a controlled setting.
So we would like you to answer true or false to that question.
The second question is asking you if implementation research outcomes are used to assess the impact of an intervention on individual or population health.
The third question is asking whether implementation research outcomes could be conceptualized as the most proximal outcome of an implementation process.
And then, the last question is asking if an effective intervention may not lead to a desired outcome because of the implementation failure.
So we'd like you to take some time to reflect on these questions and to answer true or false to these questions.
So we have all seen different examples in literature
Of how an efficacious intervention or an effective intervention does not produce the result or the impact that we want or we expect to see within the population.
For example, we know of the onchocerca volvulus problem in most parts of lower/middle income countries in Africa and some parts of Latin America.
We know that ivermectin is a very effective drug. or very efficacious drug able to stop the transmission of the microfilariae that causes this deadly disease.
However, in spite of what we know of the efficacy and of efforts
that have been made to implement this efficacious intervention in different settings, we still have millions of people that are still suffering from "river blindness", which is one of the consequences
 of infestation with onchocerca volvulus.
The question is why does an efficacious intervention not lead to the widespread impact that we expect to see?
So, most of these questions are actually asking about implementation failure.
Because it takes more than just having an efficacious intervention for you to have the impact that you hope to see in the population.
Let's take another example with malaria. 
For instance, with malaria we know that a bed net works in preventing mosquito bites.
Mosquito is the vector  that transmits
 the plasmodium parasite that  causes malaria.
However, despite investments having been made into providing bed nets in endemic countries we still have the scourge of malaria and millions of children, in fact billions, millions of billions of people still suffer from malaria
 every year.
So the question yet again is why does that efficacious intervention that is to say the insecticide treated bed net not lead into the population impact that we hope to see.
Most of these questions are due to implementation failure.
So what we are saying here is that we find that we have an efficacious intervention  does not necessarily translate to impact at the population level.
Obviously some sort of activities have to take the intervention from the laboratory, from the design stage to the population that needs it.
And these are some of the things that implementation research
 tries to address.
We really try to look at the effectiveness of the implementation activities or set of strategies that have been put in place to deliver an efficacious or an effective intervention.
Let's take a pause to define efficacy of an intervention and to define intervention effectiveness and distinguish these two definitions from implementation effectiveness.
So, intervention efficacy.
This is the evidence for the effects of an intervention under controlled settings.
That is to say that you control all set of implementation activities, you control the context, you choose a special population group able to test whether an intervention works or not.
For instance, the initial clinical trials that were done to determine whether ivermectin works to stop the transmission of microfilariae that causes onchocerciasis, could be an efficacy trial.
The next group is the intervention effectiveness research.
Here you move an efficacious intervention from the controlled setting and you move it into the general population.
However, you still limit the set of implementation activities to the barest minimum possible to successfully implement that efficacious intervention within the general population.
So, you see here, you have moved from a carefully selected population group to broader population where the disease for which the intervention has been placed might be endemic.
However, you still control some of the implementation activities and the context in which the research is done.
Implementation effectiveness, however, really is focused on generating evidence for the set of implementation activities or strategies that you put in place to deliver an efficacious intervention within a new setting or within broader population groups under the real world conditions in which those populations exist.
So for instance, here you are no longer interested in controlling  the implementation activities or the strategies, or controlling the context.
In fact, that is the focus of your study in most cases.
So let's take a pause here and use an example to illustrate what we mean.
So let's go back to the onchocerca volvulus example that we used earlier on.
We said that conducting clinical trials to determine the efficacy of ivermectin on the transmission of microfilariae would be an example of - intervention efficacy [research] and then taking that efficacious intervention
that is the ivermectin, to the population, maybe you do in a community a trial where you randomly approach  some community to receive ivermectin and then some other community does not receive ivermectin. would be an example of - intervention effectiveness research.
You see that in this one you take it
from the controlled setting into a fairly relaxed setting within broader population.
However, you are still controlling some of the parameters so that you are able to say that the intervention is effective or not.
Now let's move into implementation effectiveness.
Implementation effectiveness now begins to look at strategies that you can use to disseminate that efficacious... and effective intervention within broader population.
For instance, let's assume that in the intervention effectiveness research you have used healthcare providers to provide the ivermectin to the people that need it.
In implementation effectiveness you might begin to look at other strategies that may be useful for doing the same thing in a new setting.
For instance, you might be trying to use community health workers or you might be trying to use policies to deliver the same drug and testing to see the impact of these differences in the strategy would be a focus of implementation effectiveness.
So with this example I hope you are clear that intervention efficacy is different from intervention effectiveness and is different from implementation effectiveness.
This thinking is actually central to the conduct of implementation research and to the whole body of work that is called implementation science.
It's really the deliberate focus on implementation to take our eyes away momentarily from the intervention and now only focus on the implementation, focus on the activities that have been put in place to implement an intervention.
That is the basis or the focus of the implementation research.
Let's go back again to this example that we presented earlier on, looking at why efficacious intervention or effective intervention do not generate the impact
 that we hope to see within the population.
So, there are 6 broad categories that we've outlined in this slide.
One of the first examples of implementation failure or one of the reasons why an efficacious,
 an effective, intervention might not yield the results
that we expect within the population is the failure to roll out the intervention in the first place.
So let's imagine that we have this efficacious ivermectin drug that is just staying in the  lab somewhere and is really never delivered to the population that needs it
 in parts of Africa or Latin America.
We are really never going to find the impact that we hope to see.
The second example is actually the failure to penetrate the health system.
Imagine that the service for providing ivermectin is going to be provided through health facilities and is only restricted to one or two health facilities within an endemic region.
We’ll see  failure in that regard because we have not been able to reach as many health facilities within the system as possible.
So, failure to penetrate a health system with an efficacious intervention might also be another reason for implementation failure.
Closely related to that is the lack of coverage that often is caused with most efficacious or effective interventions.
That is to say what proportion of people that are eligible for the intervention are actually getting it.
If an adequate number of people are not getting the intervention we would not see a mark or a dent even, in the impact of the intervention  within the population
 that we are interested in.
Yet another example is the failure to implement the intervention as prescribed.
So that is to say that when the intervention was designed it was designed under a particular protocol.
That's an expectation of the dosage or the frequency with which the intervention should be delivered.
When you fail to adhere  to some of these steps and to some of these protocols, the intervention would not produce the results that you hope to see within the population group.
And then the fifth example here is the failure to reach the at risk population.
So you could as well go to the entire population but if you fail to reach the target group you'll find that the  niche in which the disease processes occur  within the population will continue to exist because you have not addressed the population that was affected.
So, that is another reason why implementation failure could account for the reason why we don’t have  impact of the efficacious intervention within a broader population.
And then the last example is very common.
It’s this lack or failure to sustain an intervention.
Take for instance an onchocerca volvulus prevention programme.
I mean, we have control programmes that have been made to deliver ivermectin to endemic populations that need the drug.
However, this is only a control.
When we fail to sustain the intervention over a sufficient period of time what we'll find out is that the disease that we are trying to curtail would actually re-emerge and would resurge again.
And that would be an implementation failure.
So, lack of sustainability is also another reason why we don't see impact of efficacious intervention within the population.
So, I've carefully outlined these six broad categories.
Because often times addressing these challenges or these issues forms the major body of work in implementation research.
And testing strategies to address these issues or these challenges forms the focus of implementation effectiveness research.
So, to summarize all that I've been saying: 
You cannot have impact with only an efficacious intervention.
That is to say that having an efficacious or an effective intervention is not sufficient to generate impact within the population.
Interventions that are effective and are efficacious must be backed up
 with effective implementation activities.
And it’s only when you have these two together that you actually have impact at either the individual level or the population level with regards to health.
Most research in Public Health has focused on generating evidence for interventions.
And that’s why we have a lot of efficacious interventions that are sitting on the shelf and we are not seeing the impact that we hope to see within the population.
And we've actually neglected focus on implementation.
And the whole essence of this module is to begin to shift our thinking on how we think about  public health problems.
Thinking more in terms of implementation, and implementation failure, and how to prescribe strategies
 to overcome  these and how to test these strategies
 in a form of research within  larger frameworks of public health research.
Here [if] we do have health outcomes that are commonly used as outcomes of efficacy research or effectiveness research.
For instance, for most clinical trials we use an outcome like morbidity, mortality, clinical function or symptomatology as [an] outcome of the success of our research.
And the same is true for effectiveness research.
So these are all health outcomes that are commonly used for testing or generating evidence for the efficacy or the effectiveness of an intervention.
So if we have distinguished implementation effectiveness as a separate line of inquiry from intervention efficacy, intervention effectiveness, so what kind of outcomes can we use to test implementation effectiveness and not confuse it with intervention effectiveness or intervention efficacy?
So that is to say that we can no longer use the same set of outcomes that we call health outcomes, for implementation research.
So, they are [a] special kind of outcome that helps us to see whether a set of implementation activities works or not.
And they are distinct from health outcomes like morbidity and mortality that helpus to see whether an intervention works or not.
This set of outcomes that looks exclusively at the success or the failure of implementation activities are what we call implementation research outcomes.
Before we conclude this chapter
I would like to show you a framework on how to think about implementation research.
Implementation research outcomes have been defined as constructs that describe the effects of a deliberate or purposive action to implement an intervention.
That is to say this outcome defines exclusively the effect of the set of implementation activities or strategy as distinct from the effect of the intervention itself within a larger programme setting.
And therefore they are useful for measuring success or failure of implementation or of implementation strategy.
Before we go on I'd like to show you an example of how to think about implementation research in a way that we are able to distinguish it from effectiveness research of intervention, efficacy research of intervention and implementation effectiveness.
So here we see a conceptual diagram for thinking about implementation research.
On my left side you see interventions here.
These interventions are often the focus of most public health research.
And then on my right side you see the outcomes here, which are health outcomes  that we observe at the population level,  either at the individual level or at the more aggregated level for the population.
And usually what research tries to do is to link the intervention on my left side
<i[] with the outcomes on my right side.
And we often times miss what happens in-between.
So that's why even though we find out that the intervention has worked based on changes on outcomes at a population level, or changes on outcomes at the individual level,
[but] we find it very hard to replicate those evidence-based interventions in other settings.
And this is where implementation research comes in.
So, this whole idea that you need some set of strategies in trying to carry out or to deliver an intervention within the population; and that these strategies will interact with the intervention to produce outcomes, implementation research outcomes which will tell you whether the implementation activities have been successful or not.
And is only when you have success in this set of activities or you have success with the strategies that you have improvement in service outcome at an aggregate level, if it's applicable, which oftentimes then leads on to the health outcomes that we commonly see.
So here we are saying that the core of implementation science is the description about implementation strategies or thinking about how implementation strategies work within a particular setting.
And being able to articulate this effect using measures of implementation research outcomes and linking these Implementation Research Outcomes to the health outcome that we hope to see at the individual level or the population level.
This forms the core of implementation science and forms most of the work or the body of work that implementation research covers.
And indeed, implementation research outcome is central to this knowledge. because without the outcomes we are not able to distinguish the effect of the implementation activities from the intervention effectiveness or from the intervention efficacy.
So I hope this helps you to think about implementation research, and also I hope it helps you to think about implementation research outcomes and how central it is to the conduct of implementation research.
To kind of recap all that we have been saying so far let's go back to the quiz that you took at the beginning of this chapter.
Remember, at the beginning of chapter 1 of this module we asked you if implementation effectiveness could be defined as the impact of an intervention under a controlled setting.
By now I'm sure you will agree with me that that would be false.
Because looking at effect or generated evidence for an intervention under a controlled setting is actually intervention efficacy.
And when you do that within a larger population group that's intervention effectiveness.
But when you are trying to generate evidence for the implementation activities as opposed to the intervention then you are really in the domain of implementation effectiveness.
The second question had asked you if implementation research outcomes are useful for assessing the impact of an intervention on individual or population health.
Again, this would be false.
We know that health outcomes have been specifically described as useful for measuring impact at individual health levels or population health levels.
And we have said that these health outcomes are used for measures of intervention efficacy or intervention effectiveness.
Implementation research outcomes on the other hand
 look at success or failure of a set of implementation activities.
And these are actually more proximal to the implementation activities as we saw from the diagram that was presented on implementation research.
So, the third question was asking you exactly that: if implementation research outcomes could be conceptualized as the most proximal outcome of an implementation process.
And that is true.
Remember the diagram: we have the evidence-based intervention, we have the implementation strategy and then the first set of outcomes that we see that tells us how successful has the strategy worked in a particular context with the list of implementation research outcomes, which may in turn mediate the service outcomes and the population end outcomes that we see at the end of the diagram.
And then the last question was asking yourself if an effective intervention may not lead
 to a desired health outcome because of implementation failure.
And the right response again would be true.
We listed at least six broad categories or reasons why implementation failure might cause a lack of population health impact for an efficacious intervention.
All of these are different reasons why interventions might fail
 to produce the impact that we hope to see.
I would say that this implementation failure or prescribing strategies  [to address] this implementation failure forms the focus of implementation research.
And testing these strategies actually forms what you are trying to accomplish by doing studies on implementation effectiveness.
