Here we are going to continue with our review of these studies that have used implementation research outcomes, and we're going to be looking at two additional papers in addition to the four papers that we have examined in the second video.
In the fifth example, we look at how the impact of pre-packaging antimalarials and what is the impact of these on early treatment of childhood fever.
This is the study that was done by Sirima et al in  Burkina Faso and they were looking at whether training mothers on how to use pre-packaged antimalarials could help to control malaria for very young children.
So these are malaria drugs that have been pre-packaged by dose for different age groups, and the mothers were provided training on how to use these.
And again, they looked at whether mothers were indeed able to carry out what they were trained to do.
That is to say they measured fidelity: to what extent can mothers carry out the set of implementation activities around the delivery of the pre-packaged antimalarials for their children.
And at the end, they found that yes, indeed with appropriate training mothers actually can do this successfully.
That is to say, that the programme had high fidelity and the additional thing that they did in this study, is that they were able to show how this change in implementation research outcome that is, fidelity, was linked to health outcomes because they were able to also show in the same study that not only was there high fidelity with regards to the way the mothers were using the pre-packaged antimalarials but they were also able to show that this led to the reduction in the incidence of severe malaria.
So the last example that we're going to see today from the projects that have been supported by TDR is a study by Akogun et al in Nigeria.
The study looked at community directed treatment of onchocerciasis with ivermectin.
So they were looking at testing different strategies in delivering ivermectin within the community.
So there were two main [strategies] here.
We had a set of strategies that were designed according to the programme and then we had another set of strategies that were designed by the community themselves, and then both of these strategies were compared to the current status quo, that is to say, having the whole system run the programme as it normally had been even before the strategies were implemented.
And they tested even these different strategies by looking at changes in fidelity, coverage, cost and feasibility, and they were able to show that either the programme design strategy, that is to say, choosing village heads or women within the community to deliver ivermectin or the community designed strategy that , they actually worked in terms of adhering to the core components of the control programmes.
And they also saw that the cost was reasonable, even overtime, and the coverage of the ivermectin control was sufficiently high and then, that indeed that it was possible, it was feasible for the these different strategies to be carried out within this community.
In this second section, we're looking at how relevant implementation research outcomes are for different stages or phases of implementation research.
Remember during the introduction we have discussed implementation activities, research or practice as involving three main phases.
The first phase is the early phase where you're contemplating or planning, or deciding to implement an evidence based intervention.
And then the second phase is the middle phase where the intervention has been ongoing for quite a while and the concern is around ensuring quality of delivery and continuous improvement overtime.
And the last phase is when the intervention has been done for some time, and one is beginning to transition into integrating the intervention into the current system within the setting or the organization
What we found out is that different types
of implementation research outcomes are actually useful as measures of success, during the different phases of implementation.
For the early phase, measures such as acceptability, such as feasibility or appropriateness are useful to help us gauge the readiness of the particular organization or setting, in adopting an intervention or also engaging the likelihood of success of the intervention.
And thenother measures like acceptability, adoption, feasibility, fidelity, cost and coverage, are useful for the middle phase when the intervention would have been carried out for some time.
So you see, it doesn't make sense for us to begin to measure fidelity during the early phase, because [the] early phase is still the time when we're still planning and we're trying to carry out the intervention as we should.
While it makes a lot of sense for us to begin to measure fidelity, that is to say, what is the quality of the delivery, to what extent are they adhering to the protocol of the intervention during the middle phase when the intervention has been ongoing for a while.
And then we have the late implementation stage where we're thinking more of integrating the intervention into an existing system, and here we're thinking about issues of sustainability, we're thinking about issues around coverage; how can we increase the coverage, how can we scale up the intervention and so on and so forth.
So we have specific implementation research outcomes that are also appropriate for this stage.
The point to make in section two, is that different types of implementation research outcomes are relevant for measuring effectiveness of implementation activities at different stages.
There are some implementation research outcomes that are useful during the early stage, there are some that are useful during the middle stage, and there are others that are useful during the late stage.
The importance is to be able to know at what stage the implementation activity is, and what set of implementation research outcomes to prescribe as the test of our implementation research effectiveness.
So in this section, we're going to be looking at the usefulness of implementation research outcomes as measures of contextual factors that could be used to access health system readiness.
We acknowledge that there are other indicators
 that are in use or that have been proposed.
For instance, some people use the balance score card and some people use the service readiness assessment tool designed by WHO as measures of some contextual factors at the downstream of the health system, even as a measure of health system readiness.
However, the utility of implementation research outcomes is that it could be used to measure some upstream contextual factors.
Example of downstream contextual factors would be things like infrastructure that are available within the health system, the staffing, level of staffing, the level of resources that is available to the staff and so on and so forth.
There are tools that are useful n for doing this already.
However, some of these tools do not measure optional factors such as what is the willingness of a community to adopt an intervention, is there a push? Is there a pull?
Is there a demand for implementation  activities, and so on and so forth?
This is where implementation research outcomes could serve as a complement to some of the existing tools for assessing health system readiness.
For instance, we might be interested in knowing who are our main stakeholders for the adoption of this intervention.
We might be interested in knowing whether there is  the demand to implement the intervention.
We might be also interested to know, is there a push out by donors or by some other stakeholders who are external to the setting in which the intervention is going to be implemented, or might in fact want to know whether there is a pull.
That is to say, are the community really making a demand?
Are they really eager to have interventions in place within their settings?
Or we might also want to know what are the infrastructures?
Apart from the infrastructures that are available at the health system level, what are the infrastructures that are available that will enhance even the smooth uptake of the intervention?
For all of these broad domains, implementation research
outcomes could really be useful.
So the point here is this, that implementation research outcome has utility.
It has utility for testing implementation effectiveness.
It is salient for different stages of implementation and again, it is also useful for assessing upstream contextual factors that can allow us to gauge the readiness of the health systems to adopt an intervention.
We're going to round up this chapter by looking again, at the quiz that we presented at the very beginning.
I know by now, a lot of the concepts and a lot of the questions that were asked in the quiz would have become more clear to you
So let's look together again, at the quiz questions and let's see what the right answers are.
So the first question we had asked you if the following are examples of implementation research outcomes.
Mortality, mobility, and disease incidence.
So you will agree with me that these are really health outcomes and they are not examples of implementation research outcomes.
The second question asked you if implementation research outcomes are only single-domain constructs and if they are heuristically defined.
Again, the right answer here will be false, because we know that implementation research outcomes could be construed as single-domain constructs such as implementation costs, acceptability, or they could also be construed as multi-domain constructs such as fidelity and feasibility.
However, we know that invariably all implementation research outcomes are heuristically defined.
We said that they are defined based on the actual experience of the implementation.
That is to say, their definition is operationalized based on how the implementation activities are carried out.
Now, the third question asked you whether implementation fidelity could be assessed by examining adherence to the intervention protocol and quality of delivery.
And the right response here, is true.
Measure of adherence, measures of quality of delivery of dosage, of frequency and so on, are examples of ways by which we can take measures of implementation fidelity.
And then the fourth question asked you whether various implementation research outcomes are relevant for research focused on different temporal stages of implementation.
Yes, the answer here is true.
Remember that diagram that we showed you that we can think about implementation consisting of different stages
The early stage, the middle stage and the late stage, and we said that different types of implementation research outcomes are relevant, are salient for these different stages of implementation.
And the last question asked you, whether fidelity measures are some of the most common implementation research outcomes in assessing health systems' readiness.
Now, the right answer here is false.
However, this is a little bit tricky because we really need to think about what we're  trying to accomplish when we measure health systems' readiness.
When we measure health systems' readiness, we're trying to gauge the readiness of the health systems.
We're trying to gauge the willingness of participants to adapt to intervention, we're trying to assess the strengths and the weaknesses within the system.
We're trying to use that to predict how successful our intervention, or our implementation activities are going to be.
However, when we do measures of fidelity, we actually would have had to be carrying out the implementation projects.
So you see that, in that regard, implementation fidelity might not be a good measure of our system's readiness.
So, this concludes chapter two, of module four, and when we come back in chapter three, we're going to be looking at how to measure implementation research outcomes, thank you.
