Welcome to CIME’s lecture on Transmission Electron Microscopy for Materials Science.
In the last few lectures on the basics of electron refraction, 
I have looked at the theoretical case of two beam electron diffraction as we saw in this case.
We have one plane H.K. L which is inclined related to the incident electron beam at the exact bragg angle 0B. 
We have strong scattering from that plane giving a diffraction pattern.
Which has two strong spots: one for the drainfield the
0 0 0 and another for the diffracted beam. HKL.
However if we look back at the video of electron diffraction,
I showed in my first lecture you will see in the video that there is another case of refraction where we have many different diffraction spots. So scattering from many different beams also showing a high degree of symmetry. This is a so-called zone axis diffraction pattern and this is the case that I'm going to look at in this lecture as an example we can look at two experimental diffraction patterns taken from a single crystal of silicon in this pattern.
I once again show you the case of two beam electron diffraction here with the plane with minute indices h k l of two to zero at the exact bragg condition. So we have strong scattering into this diffraction spot such that we have strongly excited the diffraction vector G to 2 2 0.
In this case I have instead aligned the crystal such that it's
0 0 1 axis that is z axis is aligned exactly parallel to the incident electron beam. This gives the so-called 001 zone access diffraction pattern.
We will now look at this case a bit more closely. So if we look at this pattern.
We can see that we have many different refractive beams so-called multiple beam scattering the crystal has been aligned or what we call a low index lattice vector effectively an important Crystal graphic direction.
For instance if you have a cube a crescent such as silicon this could be.
A direction such as 0 0 1 1 1 0
0 1 1 1 this lattice vector will have these indices
U V W and we'll call these the zone axis. So the zone axis corresponds to the direction in the crystal which is aligned parallel to the incident electron beam. In this case we have diffraction from planes in the crystal which are parallel to that incident electron beam. So the electron being these planes look like they and on with each plane giving a corresponding diffraction spot.
Multiple beings are excited at the same time. In this condition we obtain a diffraction pattern which has lots of symmetry. So if we look at this pattern in particular we can see a mirror plan here, a mirror plan here, another mirror  plane here and a fourth mirror plane here. Instead looking at rotational symmetry we can see that there is 90 degree rotational symmetry through the diffracted beams. So we have fourfold rotational symmetry a tetrad. And we can observe that this Mirror and rotational symmetry corresponds to the rotational symmetry for the 001 direction in the crystal. In other words we have a diffraction pattern which has the rotational mirror symmetry of its corresponding lattice vector in the real space. Crystal lattice So why does such a diffraction pattern fall in this zone axis condition to gain some insight into the formation of this zone axis diffraction pattern. I'm going to make a simple analogy and say that in the zone I say it's condition. Our Tim Optix and sample are similar to the condition for a diffraction grating in frown Hoffa farfield geometry. Here I have a representation an illustration. Of this diffraction grating and we can see that we have an incident plane wave with a wavelength Lambda being scattered by a regular array of slits with each slit having the spacing the when this incident plane wave is scattered by the grating each slit actually the source of a spherical wave that is spreading out we can represent that wavelet as arrays scattered at different angles which here are called 0. Now what we can see is that at certain angles
0 Per nod rays have a perf difference which will correspond to that for constructive interference. In other words this past difference here which equals
Dsin0 by corresponds to one or multiples of a wavelength. In other words we have constructive interference when
Dsin0 equals N times Lambda, Lambda is the wave length and is an integer. If we now put a screen sufficiently far from this diffraction grating then we will be in a far field geometry where parallel rays come to a point and we will obtain a diffraction pattern. Well first of all we'll have a spot in the center corresponding to the beams that are scattered straight on the direct beam. But then for sin0 equals lambda over D we will obtain another diffraction spot here. So with an angle of scattering given by sin0 equals lambda over D then we'll have another spot here. For two lambda
D three lambda over D and so on and their inverses. The other side. So you can see that this grating has given a diffraction pattern of regularly spaceports. As an exercise. You can prove to yourself that in the small angle approximation for this farfield geometry the angle of scattering between the diffraction spots is exactly the same as you would obtain for Bragg diffraction and electron diffraction pattern.
We should also note that this found half of farfield case is equivalent to the back focal plane of the objective lens and TEM because in both cases parallel rays come to a point we shall now use this diffraction grating approximation to help construct a zone axis diffraction pattern for this example. I'm going to take a very simple case of a primitive dragooning unit cell such that there are no systematic absences in the reciprocal of lattice.
And we're going to take an alignment of this dragooning unit cell of the electron beam parallel to the lattice vector 0 0 1. In other words parallel to the Z axis of the unit. So so here
I show an illustration of a two by two block of unit cells in this orientation being drag and all we have A equals B.
So we just have a simple square full and now we're going to look at the planes which are parallel to the incident electron beam. In other words the electron beam will view them as and on planes and take each plane and turn and say that is like a diffraction grating and we'll see which diffraction spot it will make in our diffraction pattern.
So if we start off even without any of it of course we will always have a central direct beam in the diffraction pattern the so-called 000. Now we consider diffraction from planes.
First of all I take this plane. Here we can see that this plane is parallel to the y axis and intersects the x axis at one unit. So parameter. So this is clearly a 1 0 0 plane like a diffraction grating. It will make a diffraction spot in our diffraction pattern perpendicular to that plane. And with a spacing which will be the reciprocal of the plane spacing D, so we get a diffraction spot looking like this. Now we move on.
Consider another plane we can see that this plane is in a state parallel to the x axis and intersects the y axis at one unit so spacing. So this is clearly the 0
1 0 plain this plane has exactly the same spacing as the 1 0 0. But it is perpendicular to it. So it will give a diffraction spot over here with the same spacing as the 1 0 0. But at an angle of 90 degrees. Now we move on and consider this plane. We can see where this plane intersects the x and y axes 1 unit cell spacing. So this is going to be the 1 1 0 plane and spacing is one over route to or the spacing of the 1 0 0 plane the 0 1 0 plane.
So it's going to give a reciprocal lattice facing which is Route 2 times larger than this spacing here. Also it's at this angle here is going to give a spot then in this direction. So it's going to give a spot over here the spot for 1 1 0 plane. Moving on I consider this plane we can see that this plane is parallel to the 1 0 0 but it intersects the x axis at half units or spacing. So it's going to be that 2 0 0 plane being parallel to the 1 0 0. It's going to give a spot in this direction. We're having half the plane spacing of the 1 0 0 the scattering angle will be two times that of the 1 0 0. So it gives us here the
2 0 0 moving on. It On this plane. Here it intersects that half on the x and y axes. So clearly the 2 2 0 plane being the 2 2 0. It's going to give us a lot parallel to the 1 1 0 but having half the plane spacing is going to have double the scattering angle.
So it will give us support over here and we can keep on going here I put  on the
3 0 0 plane which of course is parallel to the 1 0 0.
So we'll give a spot in the same direction but with three times the scattering Ango.
So giving us support here and we can keep on going and as we do this we build up this diffraction pattern which by symmetry includes inverse planes such as the bar 1 0 0 and 0
1 0. And we can notice a number of things about this. One thing we can see that it looks like a section through our reciprocal lattice which indeed it is. Secondly we have associated each diffraction spot with the Milliron disease H K L out of the plane that's created it.
This is called indexing the diffraction pattern. The third thing I'll point out is that here we have our electron beam parallel to 0 0 1 0 0
0 1 is our so-called zone axis. And we can note that all these planes being parallel to the zone axis obey the vises zone law. Age you plus cavy last year equals zero the rule which applies for playing age Khail being parallel to that has vector you VW. Now we have looked at the formation of the zone access diffraction pattern by the simple analogy of the crystal as a diffraction grating.
We should instead look at the diffraction pattern formation by the ewald sphere reciprocal lattice representation. So that's what I have done here.
Here we have the ewald sphere. And the vector for the incident beam KI. And when we have this geometry what we see is that one layer. Of this. Reciprocal lattice is now tangential to the ewald sphere.
And what's more is that when we have this geometry we see that the ewald sphere actually does not intersect any of the reciprocal lattice nodes in this layer directly around the 0 0 being.
In other words the Bragg condition is not met. Now this is the exaggerated.
Evil sphere representation that I showed before we can make it a realistic representation as follows. So here now the curvature of the ewald sphere corresponds to what we would see for a two hundred kilovolt beam and a reciprocal lattice for both the center cubic ion. But even in this case we can see that even with this very flat ewald sphere.
The surface of that sphere does not intersect. Most of these reciprocal lattice nodes in other words the bragg conditional scattering for these reciprocal lattice nodes is not met. And if the bragg condition is not met theoretically there should be no scattering from these planes.
And we should not have all these diffraction beams that we in fact see because experimentally we know we have strong scattering from many planes in this zone axis condition. So we have some problem in our representation using the ewald sphere and reciprocal lattice. For the zone axis condition. To summarize when the electron beam is parallel to some important crystallographer direction or so-called low end zone axis UAW we have Taina zone axis a fraction passion which has multiple scattering in many different beams.
This pattern can display high symmetry with mirror and rotational symmetries which correspond to that of the real crystal lattice.
Further in this condition we had diffraction from planes which are parallel to the incident beam and so parallel to the z axis U V
W. And because of this the vice zone or law is met.. So all of the planes directly around that direct beam obey the vice alone or wherever the plane HKL, HU plus KV plus LW equals zero
On the other hand when we represent this condition using our ewald sphere reciprocal lattice representation we find that the Braggs scattering condition is not met.
Clearly there is a problem in our representation. The problem in our representation is because while the recipient lattice nodes so far have been represented as infinitely small points. In fact they have a size in a shape and the size and shape leads to a relaxation of the bragg scattering condition and we obtain multiple scattering in our schematic diagram.
And this is what we will look at in the next lecture.