Hello again.
Just in case you don't remember, I'm Pascale Allotey
Professor of Public Health at the Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health Sciences
Monash University, Malaysia.
Congratulations on working your way through the first four modules of this MOOC on implementation research.
In this fifth and final module, I'll start off with a brief recap to help to consolidate the main messages before handing you over to the coordinators of this module,
Dr. Paul Milligan and Dr. Corinne Merle.
The aim of implementation research is to determine how to take interventions, tools, or treatments that have been show to be efficacious under controlled conditions and make them available to those that need them and to ensure that the systems are in place to support sustainability.
We focus particularly on infectious diseases of poverty in this MOOC because they remain significant causes of morbidity and mortality in resource poor settings, public health efforts for control require participation at all levels and poverty and other social determinants of health have a major impact on access to health, healthcare, and treatment options.
That not withstanding, the concepts articulated in this MOOC will have broader application to implementation research in other areas of disease control, prevention and health promotion.
In module one, we had Professor Oladele Akogun and Professor Hans Remme to outline a range of definitions in conceptual areas in implementation research.
You may recall this diagram, where we explained the need for rigorous research to determine the strategies required to ensure that efficacious solutions were actually able to address the significant health problem.
We used this diagram do describe how implementation research is used to identify and investigate problems that affect effective implementation and develop and test implementation strategies.
Hans explains that implementation research involves three major phases.
The first is defining the problem.
The first phase requires an understanding of the context, identifying the problems that arise within that context and identifying possible strategies or possible solutions to address these problems.
Phase 2 involves the design of the strategy and this needs to be set up to ensure that it is possible to understand the mechanisms for success or the reasons for failure.
And phase three then outlines testing the strategy and  inherent in this phase is the clear establishment of expected outcomes of the implementation strategy to ensure that the framework is set for monitoring and evaluation of the success of the strategy.
Another important take home message of module one is an understanding of where implementation research fits in with related approaches such as intervention research, operational research and health systems research.
Intervention research establishes the efficacy of the intervention, that is, for instance, does mass administration of ivermectin break the cycle of transmission of onchocerciasis
 or does home management of malaria reduce deaths in infants?
These tell us what would probably work but now how to make it work.
Implementation research tells us how we can make that intervention work within the community or within the population.
Part of making it work may therefore involve an element of health systems research which explores the factors that affect the performance of a health system.
An implementation research could also incorporate aspects of operational research which addresses operational challenges within health systems.
And ultimately, effectiveness research is how we assess the performance of our implementation strategies in real life situations.
The clear message of Module One is that implementation research has to take into account the complexities of working in real life contexts away from the imposition of artificial or controlled conditions, that are necessarily imposed by an intervention research framework.
Module Two on settings and context was presented by Professor Uche Amazigo and Professor Bill Brieger.
Uche and Bill begin to highlight just how complex the real life environment is requiring an understanding of how to work within economic and political context, with an often large range of actors at multiple levels.
It also requires working with a broad range of processes, systems and regulatory environments.
And finally, having to work with individuals who are constrained by knowledge, culture, belief systems problems of access, and so on, all of which need to be understood to understand the context in which implementation is supposed to occur.
They took us through the various research processes that will help to unpack this complexity starting with a needs assessment to help identify the issues from the community’s perspective and from the implementer's perspective.
They highlighted various primary and secondary sources of data and the importance of framing the research question to ensure that you collect the right sorts of data.
An important point they raise is the need for longer term planning to ensure that their understanding of context remains dynamic and provides the right sort of data to enable you to assess your implementation strategy not just for the short term effectiveness but also with the potential to follow through to ensure sustainability and where appropriate, to monitor the elemiination of the disease.
The next module was Module Three, which was on the design of implementation strategies.
Professor Maria Rosario Martins, Doctor Neil Alexander and Doctor Jorge Arroz took you through Module 3 on the design of implementation strategies and the research approaches required to ensure robust evidence to justify your implementation approach.
They stressed the importance of using a combination of relevant theories, empirical evidence on what works and, of course, a healthy dose of pragmatism based on your available resources, the environment in which you have to work and the communities with whom you will need to engage.
They provide examples of specific strategies that are needed, for instance for different levels of actors who are part of the implementation process.
An important lesson here is that it becomes evident very quickly that implementation research involves multiple strategies each of which will need to have well defined outcomes for evaluation.
It also becomes clear from Module Three that the importance of the research question cannot be underestimated in the design of your research.
In Module Four, Doctor Olakunle Alonge and Doctor Vivian Go provide a detailed explanation of how to evaluate implementation research by clearly articulating appropriate implementation research outcomes.
They start by making an important distinction between efficacy of an intervention and implementation effectiveness.
So, intervention efficacy is the effect of an intervention under controlled settings.
Intervention effectiveness is the effect of an intervention in a real world setting.
Implementation effectiveness is the effect of efforts including strategies, to deliver an effective intervention in new settings, other than where it was previously tested for effectiveness and/or, within broader populations under real-world conditions.
Such efforts include getting the effective intervention adopted, sustained, and scaled up.
I hope that was clear.
Specific outcomes may relate, for instance to acceptability, sustainability, compliance, appropriateness, penetration, or coverage, and so on.
It is critical that these outcomes take account of the context and this point then links us back to all the concepts that have been addressed in Modules One through Four.
I will now hand you over to Doctor Paul Milligan and Doctor  Corine Merle who coordinated this fifth module and they bring it to life by bringing together a range of stakeholders and community members who have applied all of these principles in practice.
Of particular relevance are the discussions about what is required in the scale-up of your implementation research within your setting or with broader application elsewhere.
Thank you for staying with us this far.
I sincerely hope it's been worth your while.
Sharing these resources and experiences with you has been an absolute pleasure for all of us.
Thank you.
