Welcome to CIME's lectures on transmission electron microscopy for material science.
In this video, we will see the effect of a thin specimen which only affects the phase, the weak phase object approximation.
And what's the influence when we consider the contrast transfer function.
So now I am back with my specimen, the electron wave that comes on the specimen and is a plain wave.
And I have the electron wave after the specimen called F from air.
This is affected both in amplitude and phase.
At that position I have the phase shift, which depends on the thickness of the specimen t.
Here is the amplitude and the phase.
If I have a sin specimen, only the projected potential will affect the phase.
I can write the phase shift as pi over lambda E Vt from r.
Since I have a thin specimen, the face shift is small.
Lambda is the wavelength of the electrons and electron energy.
So if I have a very thin specimen, the amplitude is not affected, so A from r is equal 1.
And the phase shift is extremely small, so pi over lambda E Vt from r is much smaller than 1.
With this I can rewrite f from r.
This called the Weak Phase Object Approximation.
We will now look at what is the influence of the objective lens on this object wave.
So we keep the specimen object wave in the Weak Phase Object Approximation.
And we know at the objective length.
The objective length is described by the point spread function.
And it's 48 transfer one, the contrast transfer function.
Which is the 48 transfer one of the point spread function.
After the objective length, we have the electron wave formed as an image, which is the convolution of the exit wave and the points spread function.
But what we measure is then the intensity projected on a recording device.
So the measured quantity I from r has the following expression g times its complex conjugate.
I will calculate this using the point spread function and the approximation for the exit wave.
I now insert this expression for f, but
I'll keep the point spread function.
I have a real part, an imaginary part.
So now I will consider the two parts real and imaginary part of the point spread function.
So I will first expand the convolution product, and see what's the first term is doing.
And then for the second part,
I will need to consider separately real and imaginary part of h.
I will first take care of this first quantity, one convoluted with h.
If I want to get this,
I can consider it's Fourier transform.
So this is the inverse Fourier transform of its Fourier transform which will transform this into a multiplicative product.
The Fourier transform of
1 is a Delta function,
I'm now entering reciprocal space.
So I have u times the Fourier transform of the point spread function is the contrast transfer function.
This is A and A is equal to that.
Okay, this just picks the value of H for u equals 0, which is 1, so it's also a delta function.
The inverse Fourier transform of a delta function is unity.
So A is equal 1.
So we're plotting now this equation on the next slide.
I will continue by expanding this stem to separate real and imaginary parts.
The real part will come from the multiplication of this imaginary part with this one, and the imaginary part from the last stem.
It's time now to calculate the modulus to get y.
So the real part squared plus the imaginary part squared.
Let us now come back to the weak phase object approximation.
We build it by saying that this quantity is small with respect to 1.
Now I will have this quantity, small with respect to 1 as well.
And if you look well, this will be of [INAUDIBLE].
And this can be simplified by keeping only the first order.
The two last stem,
Are negligible.
So the projected intensity only depends on the imaginary part of the point spread function.
Since now the only important quantity Is the imaginary part of the point spread function, that also means that for the contrast transfer function,
I will only need to consider its imaginary part.
The CTF was A times the envelope times B, which is exponential Y K.
If I take the imaginary part of the CTF,
I end up with A times E, both are real, times sine of K from U.
Now I also have this factor of two which arise due to the approximation we made before.
So I can define the face contrast transfer function
T from u as being A from u,
E from u times 2 sine K from u.
So this phase contrast transfer function is a characteristic of the microscope.
It includes the effect of the envelopes, and the aberrations of the objective length.
It will act as a filter in reciprocal space and go over on the transfer of information as a function of spacial frequencies.
So we have to remember now, this very important quantity called a phase contrast transfer function.
If we only have defocus and spherical aberration, we had an expression for.
This expression depending on the defocus delta f and the spherical aberration coefficient Cs.
So now, we have the fast growing function as a function of u, and we take the sign of this.
You can imagine that we have carried from u, which will grow for increasing u very fast.
If you take the sine of this, you can expect the transfer function T from u to have a very complicated form with something I don't know how it will look like at the beginning.
But for sure when I increase, go to increasing U,
I will get faster and faster oxidations.
What does it mean to have such a strange function?
If it crosses the horizontal axis,
I have to transfer function equal to 0.
That means,
I will not transfer any information.
If I have a positive or negative,
I will have inversion of contrast.
This is the spatial frequency u.
So that as a function of u,
I will have very complicated different transfer of information.
So now, you have seen how we come to the phase contrast transfer function, which is very important to explain the transfer of information in the case of the weak phase object approximation.
In the next video, we will look in more details at the phase contrast transfer function as a function of the microscope capabilities, CS and defocus, and see how it affects the image that we can record.