Welcome to CIME's lecture on transmission electron microscopy for material science.
In the previous module you have learned a lot about diffraction and diffraction contrast.
In this module I want to take to the world of face contrast for which it's important to know that electrons are waves.
But before starting this, let's go to the microscope.
My sample is made of
Indium-Arsenic-Tin nano-wires.
You have them at low magnification here on the Gallium film.
Now I have only one of them in, so called high resolution mode.
This nano-wire is well crystallized and has an hexagonal cross section and it is lying on the carbon film.
So if I make a sketch of the specimen
I will have and amorphous carbon film and the nano-were with the hexagonal cross section lying on it, which means that from the side of the nano-wire towards the center I have an increasing thickness.
That's why you recognize the bright, dark, bright, dark, bright, etc. bends which are thickness fringes you have seen them with Duncan.
But on top of this, because the nano-wire is very well oriented in it's own axis, you also recognize especially at this position the periodic contrast of white dots.
It's very tempting to call this atomic column, or atomic contrast and to think what we have there is just a projection of the well ordered atomic column seen from the top.
But on the other hand, while the contrast is very clear in that region, you see that it's getting messy in this intermediate part and then I have an inversion of contrast before I start again with something looking like white atoms in the next bend.
And then again, inversion of contrast and later on white atoms.
Actually, things will get even more complicated if I start changing the focus.
Now I'll start changing the focus of the objective lens.
Concentrate on the bend close to the edge of the specimen.
You see, I'v reached a focus where the contrast has completely changed.
I continue changing the focus now and I'm back to the original contrast.
And then, again changing back to the original contrasts well actually I'm only changing the focus in the same direction.
Now I continue changing the focus changing the direction of focus change and you see, again, how these contrasts are moving.
So, clearly there's an interplay between the focus of the objective lens, the thickness and the crystallinity of the specimen and the kind of image that I get.
To understand face contrast we need to take everything into account what the electron wave's have interacted with.
If we take the optical axis as the vertical axis, we have the electron waves that can be considered as plane waves.
Those electrons will first interact with the specimen.
After the specimen, the electron wave will be completely changed.
It will have change phase and amplitude.
We draw it as a distorted wave.
This is the incoming plane wave and this wave is called the exit wave.
It carries everything we would like to know about the specimen.
It is a complex quantity which has phase and amplitude and it's actually the quantity that we would like to access to.
But in order to access it, we then have the objective lens bellow the specimen.
Unfortunately, the objective lens is not a perfect lens, so instead of transmitting the exit wave perfectly it will transmit it mixed up with some properties that are due to the lens, like aberrations are put out by the aperture.
After the objective lens, we have the electron wave that carries information about both specimen plus the electron lens.
And then we need to measure it.
Usually we have a recording device, like a CCD camera with pixels on which we will project our electron wave but this recording device we can only measure the amplitude so we have the projected amplitude of the electron wave. it's very different from the exit wave.
In order to understand the face contrast, we need to understand this whole chain of information transfer.
And to make it a little bit more simple, we will start in the first part at describing the interaction of the electron wave with the objective lens.
In the second part, we will see how the specimen will affect the plane wave.
And then finally we will combine those two approaches to get the complete information transfer by the system and then understand what we obtain from the projection on the recording device,
Basically, this will be the subject of this module about face contrast.
So, let's start with the next video to see how the objective lens effects the electron wave.