Welcome to CIME’s lectures on Transmission Electron Microscopy for Materials Science in this video, we will have a closer look at the face contrasts transfer function and our first look at it with a simulation software and then see its effects in a real transmission electron microscope on amorphous carbon.
So from the last video you remember that we arrived to the face contrasts transfer function.
When we are imaging at week phase object with the objective lens this function is made of two parts, an envelope part.
And a second part which corresponds to a phase shift applied by the objective lens which depends on the scattering vector reciprocal  Space Vector U, even if we only have defocus and spherical aberration this phase shift is already a complicated function of U including the defocus the spherical aberration coefficient and the wavelengths of the electrons.
No. In reality we have other aberrations like stigmatism to each of them corresponds in an ethical formula that can be included in the first contra transfer function.
So getting an intuitive interpretation of that function is not easy. We will use the simulation software called
Shems to plot this function as a function of U and also the face contrasts transfer function including the envelopes you have or the instruction to download and install gem student edition on the Moogs.
And I strongly suggest that you do so to practice and follow what we will see now after starting gem student edition.
You go to the tab called drawing and you choose transfer function. You have a new screen appearing. And the first thing we would do would be to select the kind of microscope we will be working with, from beginning we take a generic microscope. Let's take the HF200
This is a Hitachi model but it has a 200 kilowatt 1.6 millimeter for the chromatic aberration coefficient 1.2 millimeter for the spherical aberration coefficient and here an energy spread of 0.6 we will put it to 0.8 with this we have standard field emission again transmission electron microscope for material science without CS correction. of course if you know the microscope you're working with. You're free to change those parameters to adapt them to your exact situation.
In the tab CTF profile we see a plot of the face contrast transfer function as a function of reciprocal unit length. So nanometer minus one it's in recipe's space. And of course this is only at trace in one particular direction in the reciprocal space which has normally two dimensions.
It includes all the terms at the beginning but we would start by removing the influence of the envelopes. So we go to the tab call envelope, and to remove all those envelopes or so there's a remaining inference from tab that drift and noise which we put to zero as well. with this the first contrasts transfer function is as we expect oscillating strongly and between one and minus one, it is because it's the same function of this complicated function of U including CS defocus and wavelengths of the electrons in the tab called CTF. Besides that CTF profile you can have a look at the 2D drawing of the contrast transfer function also in reciprocal space. But here we have the view of the reciprocal vector and not just the trace in one direction. The CTF profile will be sufficient for now as we're working with aberration which have a cylindrical symmetry.
So the CTF are circular and we have all the information in a key or we found the profile.
On the right part of the screen in the top order to have access to the focus of the microscope. Let's do it with a fine so we don't change it too much and see what happens if we change the key focus with the slider. You see how the oscillations change as we change data F which will influence the face contrasts transfer function but whatever we do at high speeds frequency we have this strong oscillations Let's put back the envelopes spatial and temporal and go to option and plot's them. So no we see not only the effects on the envelope but the trace of those you can change the paramita that influence the envelopes in the tab called coherence especially the energy spread of the microscope.
OK. No we can come back to this tab. Or the tool and change the defocus. Why we have the effect on the envelopes.
Still we see strong changes in the face contrasts transfer function and we see that we're able for example to put it in a way where we have a relatively wide bent where the face contrasts transfer function is close to mine one at more or less constant while in other range of the defocus we have a crossing of the zero axis in the middle of the excess CBer spatial frequencies.
As zero crossing means that we have no phase contrast transfer at
This particular spatial frequencies. In other words we have no information transferred. So we meet missing part of the information in the image
Als, We have an inversion of the sign of the face contrast transfer function. This means that we will have an inversion of contrast for the different spatial frequencies.
Before and after the crossing obviously an image acquired under those condition will not be very easy to interpret. Playing around with the defocus we find only one value of delta F which gives us this wide band of transferred frequencies. No in the tab called diffract
Gram I have the possibility to simulate the image of an amorphous specimen for example Carbon or it's diffracted gram which is the first foyer transform of the image. This diffracted gram is closely related to the face contrast transfer function dark rings corresponds to a region where no inference transferred hence crossing off the 
Zero axis in the face contrasts transfer function. The dark circle that you see appearing at some defocus and some value of U means that at those particular frequencies I have no information transfer using an amorphous specimen to look at the contrast transfer function. It's a good idea because a muffle specimen will have a wide bend of spatial frequencies over the whole specimen region. No will go to the real transmission of electro microscope to see how things look like with an amorphous
Carbon film. When we take that image and build the first foyer transfer of its image here my specimen is an amorphous Carbon film with a few very small particles.
And on the right part of that image there's a hole. So no specimen in the right path. Now you see the first foyer transform also called diffract gram of the left image. No
I will starts to change the focus going to under focus and then back to over focus you see two things on the right part in the diffracted gram.
You see this ring pattern like we had in that contrasts transfer function. On the left part on the image you see clearly the defocused carbon film. No I'm back to what? focus when I'm in focus. I have the minimum contrast and know my contrast is increasing again. I see again the Rings.
It's important to keep in mind that those black rings are spatial frequencies which are not transmitted better optical system so in that region I have no transfer of information.
So back to the simulation software where we will now have a closer look at the particular defocus for which
I had a good transfer of information we come back to the CTF profile and we play around with the focus to see if we can find an automated value of Delta F
Clearly I have a tradeoff between the width of this band and the small indentation in the middle of it. If we look at the tab Defocus. We have. Three selected value of the defocus. And
Actually, The first one. Gives me a good compromise.
No surprise. This is shared of defocus. And we will now
Try to see close up what it really means in the transmission. electron microscope. Let us have a closer look at the situation. When I choose this value for the defocus I have then the first crossing of the face contrasts transfer function with the zero axis at this frequency. I have no contrast transferred. And after this frequency the first contrast transfer function is oscillating.
This mean that we will have several crossing with zero axis where no contrast is transferred as well as part where the contrast is positive and part where it is negative. This would put those images which are difficult to interpret. We referred to this crossing as being the point resolution of the microscope.
I can obtain it. For the particular value of defocus called Schatz's defocus which depends on the wave length and the spherical aberration coefficient and which will give a good compromise in terms of with the value of the face contrast transfer function. In this first Bent
But even after this first crossing you'll see that I am able to transfer some frequency and by tweaking the defocus I could be able to nap all this frequency domain up to a certain point when the envelope are cuting completely the first contrasts transfer function. Then I cannot get anything more out of my microscope. This is called The Information limit. But what's happening if I have a C S corrected microscope? for a CS corrected microscope. the spherical aberration coefficient can be corrected and be equal to zero. Would that mean that the shifts defocus would also be zero. Let's have a look at what the simulation software tells us.
So now I come back to the same situation and microscope as before but
I will change it to have a corrected yes.
So a spherical aberration which is put to zero I find is in the tab four. And I can take the slide up and put the is actually to the value I want but
I would be choosing exactly zero.
Whoops. What happens there? I don't see my face contrasts transfer function anymore. The shifted defocus is zero.
Zero defocus but what happens. Let's look at the tab where I have the defocus and play a bit with the defocus
Indeed, if I add some defocus I see my face contrasts transfer function coming back.
That's a well known effect. If you have a perfect correction of the spherical aberration
No defocus at a weak face object, we will have zero contrast. Very good resolution but no contrast so no image of the specimen of course if you have a specimen that goes beyond the Week face object approximation you will probably see some thing but it will not be easy to interpret, the work around is to put a little bit of CS but much smaller than what you usually have in a microscope. So, in some micrometer range and then playing around with the defocus, I can again find condition where I have this Shatz defocus or white bent and the good thing is they are the point
Resolution is very close to the information limit of the microscope. But what I can do is put a negative
CS because that's allowed by the CS Correction. And then you see an invention of the contrast and especially if you adjust the defocus to have the proper wide bands of face contrast transfer function then you have a positive contrast and this will give you very nice images especially if you are imaging small particles with very thin layers now we have a quick look at how thin amorphous carbon film looks like Innes's corrected microscope at the beginning.
I have a focus of your will and actually saw so few contrasts that you probably cannot recognize where the fin is and where the hole is on the right path. You see the FFT of the left image increasing the defocus you see progressively the contrast appearing and exactly the same ring path as before on the non CS corrected microscope. Here we are not so much limited by the envelope but more made available spatial frequencies given better cabin fitter and now I will come back to zero defocus and see how the ring pattern and the image are
Changing, after that. The next step would be to look at the effect of astigmatism. So now we are back to the simulation software to look at the effect of stigmatism. First of all I want to take the same microscope as before and we'll put the spherical aberration back to
1.2 million meter. With this the CTF has the usual circular symmetry back to the tab which contains the defocus but also twofold as stigmatism we can for example change the twofold astigmatism or first puts the defocused to a value which is close to the Shad's at the focus we've seen before.
If I now play around with the twofold astigmatism actually I don't see much difference with what happens before.
We should not forget that we are looking at an aberration which has different effect in two perpendicular directions. So we really need to look at the CTF and not at the profile to understand what's going on, yet you see the strong symmetry in the
CTF in two dimension and with this
Lerdo were able to turn it on the screen. Once I put a lot of astigmatism I can play around with the defocus and see how the pattern changes in a relatively complicated way also including our crosses and over pattern and pattern patterns and so on.
I suggests that you play around yourself with the gems software to see a little bit what effect you can get.
Watching the shape of the CTF which you can see in the
FFT of the image of an amorphous Semper will obviously be a big help to correct the astigmatism of your microscope looking at the diffracted gram. We recognize a similar shape than the one we had in the CTF and indeed that would be easy to recognize on your microscope.
So now we will jump to the real microscope and see if we can see exactly the same shape as we head here.
Back to the same specimen as before just having a sled defocused to see one black ring.
My microscope was correctly adjusted. I know I would start to mess up with the astigmatism correction. You see how the diffracted Gram lose its symmetry its becoming over. Now I changed the focus and you see the same changes in the diffract gram as we had in the CTF using Jens back to the same under focus as before, now I will increase the astigmatism even further.
So that will make the diffract gram more over.
And if you look on the left image you start to see an elongated structure in the carbon film.
And when you go through the focus and then to over focus, you see how the direction of the structural change in the film This is a typical effect of astigmatism in a carbon film.
And clearly the diffracted run will be a big help to correct astigmatism and have a well aligned microscope
OK. with this video you have seen the effect of the face contrast transfer function on the thin amorphous specimen. And how is it possible to draw it with a simulation software and to image it with a carbon film in the transmission electron microscope.