An archive is like a living organism: if you want to understand fully its current structure you need to understand its history because an archive changes over time.
It moves, it gets restructured, it gets old.
Another way of seeing an archive is seeing it as a volume of volumes because what does the archive really is organizing spaces.
You have a big space cut into smaller spaces which then lead to the conservation, the indexation of smaller special units :
Box, registers, statue, painting.
Let's go and have a concrete example.
You see here the corridors of the state archives in Venice.
80 kilometers of documents, documenting a thousand years of history.
Venice is a special case because of its political origin, it maintained an archival system over very very long periods.
And this is that archival system composed of very long document series that we can now use to think about the possibility of recreating the density of the past.
You have documents, registers but you have also maps for instance.
Not one map, but thousands of maps.
And these maps give a very detailed account about the structure and spatial organization of Venice.
But also of many other places.
Let's go a bit deeper in the different typologies of documents we may encounter.
Administrative documents, testaments, contracts.
All the documents that permit to have the organization of a city.
It there are some work to be done, if there are some transformation in the city there are new laws that are voted.
All this is documented in the archives.
They used to be at different places in Venice and it's only at the beginning of the 19th century that they got in a single, very big space.
An ancient covent which is the state archive of Venice today.
Very huge building, 300 rooms,
80 kilometers of shelves and the question : how can we transform that physical space in an information system.
Are we capable of searching in so many documents.
What type of technology can we use to make it accessible.
3 steps are key to this transformation.
The first step is the digitization : we need first to transform theses physical documents into images, millions of images.
Second step : transcription, indexation, segmentation and analysing the documents so that they are searchable very easily.
And last step : connecting the information which are in the document in a big graph linking people and places.
Typical use case for us would be a search engine
I would like to be capable of typing the name of a Venitian for instance Battista Nani and find all the documents that are related with that person.
It seems an easy thing to do and we do it every day for the data about the present, it's quite difficult to do for the data about the past.
And this is the core subject of this course.
