How can we comprehend a 3D model of a city in the past?
First of all, we need to collect and examine
all the iconic and historic sources
from when the buildings were visible.
Some were better than others and not for their design.
This document is an iconic aspect called "bird's eye view".
It doesn't have exact measurements in the diagram
and it has a lot of perspective errors.
Achieved by Jacopo de'Barbari in 1500,
it is an important character in the story of cartography.
In the model by Jacopo de'Barbari,
the buildings of Rialto are very standardised
because, we know
the importance
that not every detail has to be precise.
The model must only represent the search engine
to access the documents.
For example, when we go in the Fondaco dei Tedeschi,
a building founded in the 13th century,
that would harbour Northerners,
we can click on a few programmed points
making all the documents appear
when this place and the people living there
are mentioned.
We've seen how to understand a 3D model
of a city from a perspective view
or from the iconic sources discovered at a point in history.
What happens when we have to add
the evolution in time?
We have to start the modeling of Venice
from one of the oldest areas in the city: Rialto.
According to legend, it was founded in the 5th century.
The first documents, however, began in the 10th century.
We have to make the models as standardized as possible.
The sources utilized are the primary sources
like the textual documents
and secondly, the historic interpretation
of a few documents.
We see the first wooden pontoon
before the Fondaco dei Tedeschi with 3 short clips,
the inception of the main churches of the island,
the gradual progress of the the canals and pools
and one of the reconstructions of the Ponte di Rialto
from a painting of the late 15th century.
Then there was an acceleration in progress of the model
because the vista of Jacopo de'Barbari in 1500
documents the the major construction,
with tremendous detail of the era.
The great fire of the Fondaco dei Tedeschi,
that happened in 1505, the reconstruction,
the second great fire of the Rialto area in 1514
and then a long series of transformations
a bit less evident
because after the reconstructions of the 16th century
until 19th century
the island remains more or less similar to its current state.
