EXPLORING HUMAN'S SPACE
AN INTRODUCTION TO GEOGRAPHICITY
In the first session we will address space we will address space first from reality that are easy to identify ourselves then we will ask why space plays a role in social life.
Finally, we will do some social theory of space through the definition of key concepts.
SESSION ONE: SPACE AS PRACTICE, 
PROBLEM, AND THEORY
Look around. In an underground train carriage passengers play themselves as far as possible from each other
In a city, we find a concentration of people and big objects.
These pictures show the various ways we use to welcome or conversely reject density in our daily life.
How can we account for this variety of situations?
1.SPACE IS US
We are spacial realities.
Our censorial apparatus makes up various spaces.
Our body's a complex system that forces and helps us in creating fixed and moving spaces.
For instance, in a given context the range of our sight is not the same as the range of our hearing.
You can hear something you can't see and vice versa.
In other words, the kind of space produced by our visual devices is not the same as the one produced by our auditory system.
Sounds and images constitute the base of two different constructions, that combine with each other and with other senses and form the representations we have of our environment.
Now, if we add the senses that our body in motion uses, we discover different relations to the outer world the body makes possible.
And it's no big deal to understand there is a strong tie between our biological equipment and our representations of space.
Without such a biological couplet, would the concept of space as it exists in almost all languages have been invented?
Probably not, and this is what
18th century philosopher Emanuel Kant expresses when he says that space and time are the a priori forms of sensible intuition, that is perception.
Thanks to these different senses, we can generally, in our practical life give a meaning to both notions of contact and remoteness which are the basic figures of human spacial realities.
As a matter of fact, the simplest descriptions
CONTACT/REMOTENESS of distance relations are actually contact, that is to say - non-distance and remoteness when distance is effective.
Our bodies have three major spacial characteristics.
First of all, as we just have seen there are multi-sensorial senses that is to say, multi-dimensional detectors of the outer space..
Secondly, they are active, that is to say, mobile.
In contrast with some objects and environments they interact with.
And finally, they are vulnerable. 
They can be destroyed, either by natural causes, or social operators at the risk of the annihilation of the inhabitant the human being.
In short, you, me, we all our spacial operators.
We are constantly changed by space and we constantly change it through our acts.
We experience, as well as we create contact, remoteness, and in between different kinds of nearness.
WAKE UP! QUESTION
HOW DO YOU SELECT YOUR SEAT
IN A RESTAURANT?
-I ACCEPT THE WAITER'S SUGGESTIONS.
-I SIT AS FAR AS POSSIBLE
FROM NOISE SOURCES.
-I TRY TO GET THE BEST OUTLOOK
ON THE WHOLE RESTAURANT HALL.
-I AVOID LOCATIONS WHERE I WOULD 
TURN MY BACK TO POTENTIAL DANGERS.
-OTHER.
