This is precisely the case for Europe, a continent that has been, for a long time, devastated by the wargame of its numerous and brutal nation-states.
A five-century geopolitical system has operated between an Eastern area threatened by
Central Asian nomad empires, and the Atlantic Rim, soon protected from invasions able to construct endured states and to project itself into overseas empires.
Europe was, simultaneously, the place that brutalized the rest of the World, and a place from where universalist inventions emerged, like the rule of law, civil liberties, democracy, social security, contemporary individuality, and public space.
During centuries, states have tried to reinforce themselves at the expense of civil society, by conquering or annexing territories, creating monopolies, levying taxes, imposing constraints on commerce, mobility, and urbanization, but, on the other side, the cities, merchant guilds, local societies, have tried to develop alternative scales and metrics.
The Hanseatic League is a good example of this type of network during the late medieval era.
The long dispute between territories and networks progressively turned to the advantage of the states and territories.
As soon as 1648, the reinforcement of the states’ power had led to the Treaty of Westphalia, to which the states self-identified as the exclusive players of European history.
This was not only a matter of political regime.
After absolute monarchy, the modern states continued the search for a centralized, unrivaled architecture of power that could help them channel resources towards their geopolitical projects.
After the first massive mobilizations during the French Revolution, the number of potential drafted soldiers became a key criterion for the handling of ever more bloody conflicts.
The states then decided to exchange democracy and welfare, again, the possibility of sending millions of young citizens to dreadful battlefields.
World War II appeared, then, as a paroxysm of a process that had begun much earlier.
Killing not only soldiers from the other party, but its own population, was the final stage of the European nation states’ supremacy in the age of totalitarianism, with their Communist-Stalinist and Fascist-Nazi branches.
The 1918-1945 period has been called, not without justification, the ‘suicide of Europe’.
Since the Renaissance, many thinkers and statesmen had proposed a European Union, but few paid attention to their voice.
The European Construction really only began when, after 1945, almost all the continent was controlled by non-European,
Soviet and American troops.
This was the beginning of what is called the ‘European Construction’.
The Treaty of Rome, signed in 1957, was the founding act of birth of what is currently the European Union, its 28-member countries, and its 500 million inhabitants.
The main idea was, and still is, to propose a voluntary unification that deliberately puts aside the use of force, and announces some principles for the incremental setting up of a peaceful post-geopolitical transnational political power.
The European Construction has long been a process that was ignored by the public opinion because it seemed both opaque and of little importance for the average European state of life.
The era of powerful, but neglected technocracy, probably began to decline as early as 1992, when the Treaty of Maastricht paved the way for a single continental currency.
The euro, and other aspects of the instauration of a European supranational power, met a strong resistance in the less urbanized areas.
This period clearly ended in 2005, when the referendums on the constitutional treaty gave a negative result in France and the Netherlands.
After the 2008 crisis, many European citizens welcomed the idea of a strong commitment from the European institutions to save the financial system, but blamed the sacrifices that were demanded from the workers, taxpayers, and consumers.
In Greece, since 2010, a significant part of the public opinion sees its country as an undesired protectorate of the European Union.
As a matter of fact, every day,
European citizens can observe the loss of momentum of economic growth on the continent, in spite of the incremental, but substantial, elements of construction of continental institutions.
The maps show that, after the first stage of the 2008 crisis,
Europe was the last part of the World to recover.
Europe is still one of the major, if not the biggest, node in the global economic network, but it's relative decline is obvious.
This point wouldn't be so negative if it only meant that other regions of the World were doing better than they used to do before.
In fact, Europe's problem has to do with the image of future, its horizon of expectations.
The conservation of a supposedly threatened heritage, and the fear that the European social model would be under the assaults of an unleashed globalization, largely occupy European citizens’ minds.
Will the Europeans be able to invent a renewed concept of future, a new narrative for a shared progress?
This question remains unanswered so far.
The Europeans will certainly be those required to propose and discuss fresh ideas on this issue.
If they gave up, the risk of a defensive closing must not be excluded, as we can observe the growing electoral success of far-right, anti-EU, anti-globalization, and xenophobic parties.
European citizens will also have to decide where the border of their society must be located.
Until now, the process of enlargement has been based on voluntary adhesion under the control of some key economic and political parameters imposed by the pre-existing members.
Within this process, and although present-day Europe is a ‘variable-geography’ space, the European Union could include about 50 states in the next decades, with the entire Balkan region,
Turkey, Ukraine, and why not trans-Caucasian states?
The following map shows the current situation of core and peripheries in Europe, which suggests that inclusion and integration should continue.
However, there is a strong tendency to stop or, at least, break, the enlargement course by using the argument that the member states have too many internal difficulties to be able to welcome new beneficiaries of a generous welfare state as it exists in Europe.
This issue raises a stimulating geographical problem.
When geopolitics is not the rationale of intersociety relationships any more, which spatial logics will prevail in the construction of a new kind of political construction, such as the EU?
Another correlative question concerns the interscale relation between the EU and the World.
If globalization continues, including its political dimension, and tends to create a fully-fledged society at level One, what would be the specific role of a continental, that is, level Two, entity?
Here, again, the citizens, inhabitants will have to decide.
An interesting study case is given by Ukraine.
As Turkey, the Western part of the former USSR, has been a twilight zone.
Will it join Europe?
Would it stay back inside new Eurasian or near Eastern influence areas, or would it remain in its historical hesitation stance?
Since its independence,
Ukraine has not only been crossed by linguistic, cultural, and political boundaries, it has been, as a whole, a border country, a buffer zone between Russia and Europe.
Since the victory of the pro-European side at the end of 2013, after months of turmoil and violence, a new phase has begun.
The Russian President, Vladimir Putin, has decided to support separatists in Crimea, and annexed this formerly Russian region to Russia again.
Armed separatists and Russia-supported uprisings, burst out in the southeastern part of the country.
The Russian government activated the weapon of gas prices to impose a change on Ukrainian leadership.
Doing this, however,
Putin, probably, has lost a long-term capability of influencing the Western fringe of Russia.
The question whether the border between Ukraine and Russia puts Crimea and Donbas in either of these countries, is not so crucial.
The pivotal point is that a borderland has been turned into a borderline.
After the Baltic countries,
Russian geopoliticians have had to admit that the traditional objective of the Russian Empire, that is, to play its moves in Europe, which was made explicit by Peter the Great, at the beginning of the 18th Century, is fading away.
The myth of the dual nature of Russia, and of a continental borderline, the Urals, located in the very middle of the Russian society, probably ceased to exist in April 2014, when Putin suggested to the Duma to ratify the annexation of Crimea.
West of Russia,
Belarus remains the only trophy territory
Putin could show as evidence of a reconquest, and this has been possible only because of the fierce dictatorial grip his friend, Alexander Lukashenko, has been imposing on the small country for two decades.
