One more concrete example of the issues raised by the Sustainable Development paradigm is space.
Are there certain spatial configurations more favorable to the three pillars of sustainable development?
The following documents show that the city – that's to say the urban configuration maximizing density and diversity – at its best, clearly satisfies the requirements of sustainable development’s three pillars.
First of all, the compact city is the best solution for developing a post-predatory approach to natural resources.
At this point it can clearly be seen how the spatial logics of farming and industry are the problems.
These two sectors,
are in contradiction with urban rationales, as the city is the solution.
As can be seen in Session 5, however, urban sprawl, or the ‘Johannesburg’ model, is not a good answer.
The more an urban area is scattered and fragmented, the more negatively it will impact upon natural environments.
The pillar of economic growth was analyzed in Session 5.
The map is a reminder of the strong correlation between the relative and absolute urbanity, and productive efficiency.
Finally, social cohesion turns out to be to the advantage of the city.
These maps representing two different cartographic languages – a cartogram based on population and a classic Euclidean map – the degree of income diversity in each small statistical area of 2,000 residents of the Parisian built-up area.
As the maps demonstrate, the maximum social mix is attained in city centers, that’s to say where density is higher, city centers are places where exposure to otherness is the most accepted, and even expected by the people, rich or poor, who have chosen to live in it.
The misguiding notion of gentrification, which is actually, a way of promoting ghettoes as a relevant orientation for urbanism, appears to be particularly counter-productive in this case.
Logically, urban issues and political scenes are good expressions of the debates about nature.
To take the example of mobility, it can be seen that each of the three nature-society models lends its own point of view to this topic, which is consistent to its general rationale.
The second graph shows that compromises are possible between these pure orientations.
Anti-urban mobility, self-mobility, or the right to mobility are possible hybridizations of two of these orientations.
Of course, these compromises do not eliminate contradictions.
Does self-mobility, for instance, include high-speed trains?
The neo-naturalist activists would answer ‘no’, just as, in the ‘post-lithic’ approach, a ‘yes’ would be perfectly consistent.
In short, the pivotal role of nature is confirmed every day in political controversies, especially when space is at stake.
The spatiality of nature is, above all, political.
