Distance, non-distance, this position is one of the foundations of human spatial dimension, but why?
Why distance?
Let's try to answer this question.
We can notice that contact is required to produce a reproducible society.
The bringing up of children, cooperation at work, social cohesion, or cultural diffusion, all suppose interactions, and, more specifically, interactions between human beings.
These interactions imply contact, that's to say, a non-distance situation between individuals.
By the way, traditional sexual reproduction supposes negative distance between bodies.
However, human history is also full of situations where people have been forced to be separated, or were separated for natural or social reasons that were out of their control.
In the 19th and early 20th century cities, for instance, industrial pollution had a repulsive power on geographies of housing for those, of course, who couldn't afford a more expensive location.
More generally, we can observe strong tendencies that make the rich of the dominant groups keep their distance from the poor or dominated groups, or confine them in ghettos, like the Jews in medieval Europe, or the Palestinians in Jerusalem, and the rest of the West Bank today.
In the case of the apartheid in South Africa, which was officially established in 1948, but, actually, present a long time before, and abolished in 1991, this unequal separation was strongly formalized in the law system, embedded in public policies, such as spatial planning, and overwhelmingly present in every single act of people's daily lives.
Either or not, a distance between two or more given realities things, people, ideas, that is the fundamental question that arises in any geographical situation.
Space is a social reality defined by the relation of distance that links it to and/or separates it from other social realities.
Let's complete an elementary vocabulary useful for the understanding of the concept of distance.
Ubiquity, landlocking, fixed, mobile, copresence, mobility, telecommunication.
Ubiquity defines the situation where an operator has an immediate access to, and a possible simultaneous presence in, all locations of a determined space.
Landlocking defines a situation where an operator can have an access to, and a possible presence in, only one location of this space.
A fixed reality, such as, for instance, a city or a state, is a social reality that would be affected in its nature if it were moved away, while a mobile reality, like a banknote or a smartphone, can be easily moved without there being any negative consequences on its existence.
In the case of human beings, movement is a competence and an experience that empowers their autonomy at any scale.
As a result, let's immediately notice this.
It's an error to assign the smallest scale to the individual just because the human body is tiny in comparison with a city or a state territory.
The relevance case of the humans are not reducible to the size of their bodies, but they are multiple, as are multiple the ways we can reach the outer world by the mobility of our bodies and through immaterial vectors too.
More details will be given on this point in the next sessions.
Now, how do we manage distances?
Since the Neolithic Revolution,
12,000 years ago, there are three major ways of managing distance.
Copresence, everything in the same place, mobility, material realities are moved, and telecommunication, where immaterial realities are moved.
The city is the expression of copresence within a societal scope.
Telecommunication did not begin with the internet, or even the telephone.
Letters provided an efficient, asynchronous mode of communication well before emails.
Furthermore, contemporary telecommunication is not only synchronized online.
Books, including e-books, CDs, DVDs, and everything that is downloadable, or uploadable, are good examples of current offline forms of telecommunication.
This diagram presents the three modalities as related to each other.
It is true that they can be seen as alternatives to each other.
For instance, if you want to eat
Thai cuisine, you can do it in a Thai restaurant round the corner, go to Thailand, or download a Thai recipe from a website.
However, the three modalities can be approached as complementary too.
As an example, the best way to profit from a city is to walk, ride, or drive to take advantage of the different locations that are part of a city, and to use the phone, or the internet, to synchronize your encounters inside the urban area, so, if the main objective is copresence, the two other ways of managing distance will be used as means to attain this objective, thus e-commerce wouldn't be possible without logistics, and it's made easier by the concentration of customers in large urban spaces.
We can now introduce the term of coopetition to sum up the complex relationships between the different ways of managing distance.
Coopetition defines a situation where a mix of competition and cooperation can be observed, for example, the institutional relations between universities.
There is cooperation within many research projects, but competition for attractiveness and global rankings.
The Randstad urban network in the Netherlands,
Rhineland in Germany, Po Valley in Italy, or polycentric megalopolises in Honshu, Japan, or in northeastern USA, are spaces where the rationale is the coopetition between cities.
