Once made more intelligible, the global rationales appear to be combining and interacting as a vortex of partially contradictory projects.
It is easy to detect the role of big actors, such as transnational companies, or the states.
What we will see now is that small actors, as small as ordinary individuals, do bring a major contribution to the shaping of today's inhabited space, including, and perhaps all the more, at the global scale.
Individuals matter.
Let's see how.
In the World are the individuals.
The apparently smallest operators are powerful spatial actors.
Let's see how they can be.
We will first retrace the slow emergence of the individual in society.
Then, we’ll more specifically focus on the spatial dimensions of the individual actor.
And finally, we'll connect individuals with contemporary global issues.
The individual has emerged as a major spacial actor with his or her spatial capital and spatial strategies.
How?
This is a long story.
The capability of a simple and single individual to become an actor– that is, an operator endowed of strategic intelligence – begins faraway, back in the past.
However, for millennia, most individuals had practically no leeway, and were totally dependent from the group they belonged to, and from the role society assigned to this group.
The process of emancipation of the individual clearly began in Europe at the end of the Medieval period, and became visible within the 18th century bourgeoisie.
We must wait for the early 20th century in Europe and North America to see the rise of a middle class, whose characteristics are precisely not to be a class, in the meaning that 
Karl Marx gave to this word.
The capacity of arbitration in strategic choices is provided by a growing material and cultural affluence that this group progressively experienced.
Beyond its economic dimension, this evolution gives the individuals the opportunity to decide on their own in fields that were traditionally predetermined by communal - family, territory, religion, social status, gender, or age - rationales.
A contemporary individual is a worker, soldier, voter, consumer, state-protected person, citizen, self-biographer, versatile actor, inhabitant.
The end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th meant in the West the advent of the individual worker because of industrialization, and the individual voter thanks to democracy.
With Fordism and the welfare state, the last two thirds of the 20th century made the individual a consumer, whilst marketing embedded this major change in the daily life of companies.
It was also a moment when, in all types of biologically defined groups – e.g. women, men, young people, children, elderly people - the right to be an individual was established, and where discriminations based on intentional practice - sexual practices and lifestyles - or on imposed attributes - ethnic origins, age, gender, or handicaps - were questioned.
All these events are entirely social and involve other roles society processes in the economic, as well as in the political sphere.
But in spite of a huge pressure to turn persons - for example, conditioning of consumption practices, the continuation of unequal industrial relations inside companies, and on the job market - the ordinary individuals have more leeway than they used to have before.
This can be measured through economic rationales - purchasing power - and non-economic rationales - knowledge, mobility, citizenship - that have substantial geographical components.
The result is the emergence of the individual as a significant actor.
And this is all the more pronounced in societies where, in spite of an uneven development, people are benefiting from a relatively equal distribution of health, mobility, education, and other public goods.
In emerging countries, mostly in Asia - and in a more contradictory way, in Latin America - the rapid eruption of a substantial middle class of hundreds of millions of people, whose members are capable of making strategic arbitrations of their lifetimes, is a major event in World history.
The Internet opened up an even more encompassing universe where individuals’ expectations are no longer evaluated by surveys, or market studies - or not only.
They turned themselves into producers, inventors, and actors of the discourses that talk about themselves.
The massive eruption of blogs is probably the best expression of this emergence with its contradictions, instability, and no doubt, illusions, but also its potential capacity to impose itself on the market of communication.
Being an actor doesn't mean being a big actor, but being able to define and implement strategic objectives in a given environment.
What's striking is that the kind of goals targeted by the different individuals throughout the World is converging.
And in spite of huge differences in power, little folks hold up their heads next to the big ones in the domains which really matter the most for an individual-- that is, long-term security, self-affirmation, the capability of developing a personal development, and of attaining an actual social recognition.
