If we try to address contemporary globality, we face a complicated assemblage of heterogeneous realities.
Clearly, the society model-- that is, considering the world as an ordinary society, such as local or national societies-- does not easily suit this apparent ontological mess.
Nevertheless, if we bring together inter-societal approaches-- using, for instance, geopolitical logics, as if the world was a mere aggregate of independent societies, and intra-society approaches-- identifying possible political issues as if the world <i>were</i> working as a full-fledged society-- we can transform complication into complexity.
In this perspective, we get to the provisional conclusion that the four principles shown in the following diagram, in their combination, offer a good approximation to summarize the rationales of the contemporary world.
We'll have an overall view on these four rationales, and we will briefly examine each of them.
The world as a set of worlds is the part of reality which most takes us back to our Paleolithic past.
A world made of human groups who are, for the most part, unaware of each other, meeting by chance and not imagining any communication between each other.
In this case, it is not even necessary to recognize the human quality to non-members of the group.
The distance between societies is infinite.
Despite appearances, this situation has not disappeared.
What is often called "cultural areas" pertains to this dimension.
These areas can be defined on a global scale according to religious or linguistic criteria, but also on a more restricted scale, according to all those specific characteristics defining communal identities which make genuine exchanges with the outside world difficult.
This is the case for religious, biological, race, blood, ethnicity, and physical-- soil, land-- allegiances.
Communal identities do not necessarily take an aggressive form.
Aggressiveness can be a response to perceived threats which may be external-- the invasion of foreign concepts-- or internal-- the secularization of identity.
More is now known about the way this works, thanks to the body of contributions made by anthropology over the last century.
An awareness of difference, not as incompleteness as 19th Century evolutionists naively believed, but as profound exteriority, also constitutes a tool with which we can gain a better understanding of our relation to the world, and avoid destroying the universes which exist alongside us-- or being destroyed by them.
The following maps show the existence of ethnic divides at different scales of sub-Saharan Africa.
Some of them are very old.
Some have been created or revived in the colonial period.
The third map shows an extreme but common ethnic fragmentation, in Ivory Coast.
This configuration has been used as a resource by the different political actors in the unrests that stained the country with blood between 2002 and 2011.
The worlds as a field of forces is the geopolitical model that is widely used in the analysis of international relations.
Even if this model uses the resources of the previous one, it is substantially different from it.
The tendency for larger and larger human groups to coalesce has been strengthened but also obstructed by the formation of states, which, in various conditions, have managed to capture a significant share of society's resources.
The state, then, appears to be a structure that is territorially rigid, and either incorporates non-state groupings, or adapts to the other states by brute force, as in the partition of the world carried out by European states and their epigones. and fully completed at the end of the 19th Century, except for the seas and the Antarctic.
The term "geopolitical logic" can thus be applied to all the processes whose focus is on the existence and territorial integrity of states.
This logic creates configurations that lead to violence, because each state, real or virtual, tends to increase its power by keeping or extending its territory-- reservoirs of resources, people-- which involves confronting its neighbors and neutralizing any paths towards border changes which might result in the loss of territory.
This widespread non-communication is manifested in the existence of as many different ways of measuring distances as each state is an actor, independent from any other.
As geopolitical atlases show, every single vision of the world has its own approach to space, with no common way of measuring the planet.
Hence, there is a great fluidity in geopolitical situations, with their always-fluctuating alliances and blocs.
The importance of a place-- which might be a town, or a strait-- can change, depending on the use that is expected of it
Thus, the three Kuril Islands that are at issue in delicate, endless negotiations between Russia and Japan, are perceived by the former as a technical element in a defense scheme, and by the latter -- as a marker of national identity.
Geopolitics, therefore, appears to be the very antithesis to politics.
Because, unless rapidly toppled, the most savage of despots has to deal with at least some sectors of the society they are leading.
For a conqueror, on the other hand, the hypothesis of the massive destruction of the population is always conceivable, if it at least guarantees the appropriation of territory, which also has the prospect of potential wealth.
The map that summarizes the field of forces model is very common.
It is the state-based map of the world.
In 1996, Samuel Huntington tried to apply the same rationale to what he called "civilizations".
These grouping areas, based on a combination of ethnic and religious allegiances, were supposed to show the threats that the West had to cope with, including, Huntington thought, preemptive wars.
This conservative, aggressive framework sees the exchanges between societies as a mere zero-sum or even as a negative game.
This approach can be criticized both as simplistic and static, as ignoring the complexity and the dynamic of societies, and seriously underestimating the communication flows of the contemporary world.
It shows the limits of the geopolitical model.
The world as a hierarchical network is quite different from the previous case.
This model clearly applies to the world economies described by Fernand Braudel and adapted by Immanuel Wallerstein to take account of their evolution.
What already existed over a part of the world five centuries ago, is today experiencing a remarkable expansion following the unification of the world by the West, and the integration of the major part of human production into a unified system of world trade.
This model defines cores, currently made up of the USA,
Europe, Japan, and emerging countries, and peripheries linked to the cores by dissymmetric flows which maintain the existing gap with the cores in the exploited peripheries, increase it in the neglected or abandoned peripheries, or reduce it in the integrated or annexed peripheries.
What is at stake here is not only a matter of trade, or even of monetary exchanges, it applies more generally to what has been called
"development"-- that is, a dynamic in the concerned society which is both multidimensional and directed towards what the dominant representations of this society consider to be progress.
The examples of Japan, then the Asian Tigers, and now China, show that the movements of the periphery toward the core do not necessarily suppose a common definition of what progress is, or a global unification of values.
In other words, the unversality of the system adapts to the existence of cultural areas
(model one) and states (model two).
It takes advantage of it, and the hierarchical differentiation, as unstable as it is, operates on the scale of a system as a complementarity that reinforces its stability.
In this regard, it is important to remember the theoretical misadventure of Max Weber, who believed possible to contend that the Chinese religions-- namely, Confucianism and Taoism-- represented unsurmountable obstacles to the emergence of an entrepreneurial class in China.
Today, perhaps with comparable inadequacy, we have no qualms about demonstrating the opposite.
We are then a long way from a rationale of territorialized power, and in the case of states, it is rather a question of networks made of places, that are equally accessible by modern transport and communications, where the issue is not to occupy areas, but to activate nodes and links or to create new ones.
The world-space formed in this way does not have the rigidity of state partitions.
Even, it is partly driven by states and other actors some of whom, the transnational firms, very powerful.
De-territorialization, like the freeing of the classic constraints of distance, is a notion that is essential to understanding this system.
Nevertheless, this space is not as abstract and arbitrary as the speed and size of financial flows crossing it might suggest.
Looked at closely, these flows do not spread by chance, and even if they are speculative, they are subject to determining factors-- sometimes constraints, sometimes resources-- which impose them their locations.
These networks cannot be understood without taking into account their geographical backgrounds, including territories, and the system of places that organizes these territories.
The internet is simultaneously global and local, if we look at its accessibility and its usages.
It is good expression of this world network, and a resource for it.
The world as a society is basically a successful combination of the three other models-- collective identity, economic and social integration, political legitimacy, structure-- at a global level.
This concept appears both so grandiose and so remote from more sordid realities that one might be tempted to rank it alongside the more optimistic myth of humanist eschatology.
A dispassionate approach to contemporary globality, in any case, leads to the affirmation of at least the partial relevance of this model.
There are in fact global issues.
We know that neither nuclear radiations nor CO2 emissions respect borders.
We also know that AIDS or other epidemics represent a new kind of phenomenon, in that they are the result of a global configuration of ways of life, and might interfere with global demographic dynamics.
The question is, to know whether there is a global way of dealing with global problems.
And yet, it can be said, at least in certain spheres, that the answer seems to be positive.
Let's take the case of global justice.
Since the Second World War, firstly in a confused way, then more clearly during the wars in Indochina (1946-1954),
Algeria (1954-1962), and particularly Vietnam (1963-1975), we have seen the emergence of international public opinion.
The origin of this movement goes back to 1859, on the battlefield of Solferino, where Henry Dunant, the founder of the Red Cross, invented humanitarian consciousness.
Another seminal event has been the unexpected creation by the Nuremberg Court, in 1945, of a first catch of a global criminal law, with the notions of genocide and crimes against humanity, that definitely trespass states' borders.
The responsibility to protect was experimented to prevent a genocide against the Kurdish population, 1991, and validated by the United Nations in 2005.
Finally, after ex-Yugoslavia and Rwanda's first implementations, the idea of an international criminal court, was officially created in 2002.
It is now accepted by large numbers of states.
There exists no democratic global government and global parliament, and the most powerful states can still impose their rule on many places and on many topics.
However, we have observed the complete failure of the unilateral US war in Iraq in 2003-2008.
The construction of a world-scale political legitimacy is not easy, but no plausible alternative is in sight.
Although relatively autonomous from each other, these models interact, and the following diagram shows how each rationale can emerge from the others.
Thus, the formation of an ethnic, territorial or religious identity can create a base for the construction of an independent state, as it happened in 19th Century Europe.
Conversely, the withdrawal of societal solidarities, and the overwhelming re-emergence of communal allegiances can lead to the crumbling of the state, like in Lebanese Civil War, 1975-1990.
Finally, we can read these models in a diachronic-- that is, historical-- way.
We can consider each explaining model and each layer of the encompassing cake, whose layout is differentiated depending on the period analyzed.
Some thousands of years ago, the communal model was clearly dominant, while the 1789-1945 period was marked by the predominance of a geopolitical, state-centered model.
Where are we now?
The hypothesis proposed by this graph is that a world-society model is slowly emerging, challenging the domination of an economic-geopolitical couple.
In conclusion of this session, we can say that in the current stage of globalization, an evolution towards a full-fledged world society is not guaranteed, but it's clearly at stake.
