Finally, public space logically constitutes one of the markers in a debate on the conception of the city.
Although there are certain nuances, on the whole, there are clearly two opposed tendencies in any city in the World today.
The opposition between ‘Amsterdam model’ and ‘Johannesburg model’ is very simple.
One assumes urbanity, in its various dimensions of exposure to otherness, density, diversity, public space, and public metrics, while the other assumes a dispersed fragmentation and a generalized privatization of space, notably through adherence to a car-oriented system.
The Amsterdam model takes predominance when living in a city implies a continuous making of society.
By contrast, the Johannesburg model demonstrates a refusal to take responsibility for the societal consequences of the technical options preferred to living in a concentrated space.
The following table suggests that cities endowed with a high degree of fixed or mobile public space are also compact, mixed, productive, and nature-friendly cities.
Serendipity, which allows value to be added to creative processes, and consisting of cognitive and emotional displacements and deviations, belongs more readily to the Amsterdam model, along with environmental protection, which provides benefits to all of its components -- air, water, soil, and biodiversity -- when faced with the urban parsimony of surface conception.
The prevalence of these models can be differentiated as three scales.
The Johannesburg model is predominant in North America and Africa, small towns, and in situations with weaker levels of urbanity
(less density, less diversity), such as in peripheral suburbs or exurbs.
Conversely, the Amsterdam model is predominant in Europe and Asia, large cities, and city centres, with the other spaces being more uncertain.
Thus the contrast between models is at its height between city centers such as Tokyo and Paris, on the one hand, and the outer periphery, or little Texan or South African towns, on the other.
Everywhere, and without exception, the process of increasing development has firstly meant choosing the automobile, which has automatically led to de-densification and a loss of diversity in less interesting neighbourhoods, and a lack of attention given to public space and the natural environment.
After this initial stage, however, certain fundamentals of social life take over.
Thus, in ‘hydraulic’ rural Asia, there was, and still is, a distinct value given to density, where people constantly reinvest into soil through human labor, proximity through the distance between industrial or agricultural and residential locations, and spatial arrangement through compact collective practices which are found in its cities.
Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, and South Korea have become creative places for the re-evaluation of urbanity.
China displays a surprising situation in which the Johannesburg model continues to prosper, even though public policies are already and unambiguously orientated towards the Amsterdam model, with reinforced densities, functional diversity, public transit, and public spaces.
Moreover, this movement is affecting the peripheral cities of the Pacific Rim, marked by Chinese immigration, such as Vancouver and Sydney, which have been resistant to this approach for a long time.
Who chooses these models?
All of the urban society does and, naturally, its most expert or powerful actors.
The distribution of these models across the map points to the modes of organization of inhabited space profoundly linked to a certain manner of conceiving liberty and equality.
The Amsterdam model makes all the inhabitants in a city its actors working continuously.
The entire city becomes a public good, available to all, and ceaselessly growing in its uses.
In a society of actors, where life choices become part of a process of arbitration amongst those actors, the pragmatic adoption of one model over another is clearly translated into political choices.
In developed countries, housing choices have progressively been added to individuals’ spheres of arbitration.
This means that a majority of households have a certain affordance, in the meaning used in cognitive psychology, that is to say, a useful grip inside an environment, possibly at a high cost to the poorest layer of an extended middle-class.
Being located within an urban area has become one criterion, among others, like ownership status, owner or renter, housing style (flat or house), or size.
Consequently, the place where most people live is not merely the result of an externally directed process of fatality, but, at least, partially the outcome of the people concerned.
We were able to show that votes for populist right-wing parties in Western Europe, which are xenophobic nationalists and anti-European Union, were strongly correlated with peri-urban residential environments, beyond contiguous built up areas, all things being equal.
From the same perspective, the present day political map of the United States shows an extreme and novel polarization between two contrary spatial size, low-urbanity territories associated with Republicans, and high urbanity networks associated with Democrats.
Furthermore, formal modelling of residential choices, centred on inhabitant individuals and constructed with realistic economic and geographical parameters, gave spectacular results.
While ‘allophilia’ - that is the search for, or acceptance of exposure to otherness, through choices to live in a socioeconomically diverse neighborhood - prevails, a compact city in conformity to the Amsterdam model is created.
Conversely, in the case of ‘allophobia’ — the refusal of diversity in urban cohabitation - the result is a sprawling and fragmented city.
During iterative processes, the model makes the decisive role played by upper and middle income groups clear.
If those capable of arbitrating do so with an allophilic tendency, then diversity is maintained, otherwise the poorest inhabitants cannot achieve this end since the other social groups flee from them.
This is where attention to ‘bobo’
(bourgeois-bohème) logic is due.
Those disposing of high income who seek diversity for some reason play an essential role in the maintenance of diversity.
This model allows for an evaluation of the specific effects of urban public policies.
It shows that if allophobia is dominant, then public action is ineffective, and individual actors bypass it to continue pursuing their project of separation.
If allophilia sets the tone, diversity-oriented residential and family policies can accompany and enhance it.
It may be concluded that, within heavy and complicated machinery-like cities, little actors play a major role.
The balance between spactialities and spaces, that is to say, between spatial actors and spatial environments, is better-assured than we could believe.
This means that major actions, deciding the place accorded to values of justice and development, may decreasingly be the result of technocratic choices or structures beyond reach, and increasingly, result from the multiform deliberations of ordinary citizens.
A recent evolution in urban planning illustrates this point.
It’s daily becoming more difficult to make decisions and to implement urban projects without a minimum of participatory processes and rationales.
In this context, public space appears both as the quintessence of urbanity and as a potentially continuous space connecting all areas within and between cities.
As a matter of fact, if we consider public transportation systems as the mobile part of public space, intra-urban and interurban public transport both requires and provides public space.
In an urban network characterized by the Amsterdam model, there is a continuity between public space inside and between cities.
This contributes to adding a third scale to any public space, beyond its own micro intra-local scale, and the urban society to which it belongs, that is, at a local level.
Public space forms part of the integration of an interconnected, interurban system whose potential size could be the global urban archipelago, and which is also a scalar measurement of a public space.
This means that a global scale can be present, in different ways in a public space, for example, in people, activities, products, and cultures, as tiny as that public space might be, and especially in metropolises.
