If the history of humanity could be attempting to be summed up in one sentence, it could be said that to begin with the 190,000 year era during which resources were mostly withdrawn from the natural environment, that is Palaeolithic.
Then, an 11,000 year period, during which there was a mix of predation and production.
During this period, it was possible to dramatically increase production, especially, once fossil fuel sources were mobilized. ‘Ecological awareness’ could now be called the cultural event leading to the conclusion among a significant number of experts and the public opinion that the Neolithic age will not be endless.
The argument is quite plausible.
If the predation/production period continues to demonstrate growth, someday, the natural inputs withdrawn from the natural environment will inevitably be exhausted.
As we'll be seeing later in this session, this option collides with the image of traditional agricultural industry, which perceives the mix of predation/production to be a normal, unquestionable way of life for societies.
It will also be seen that within the discourses pertaining to the ecological awareness corpus, there are two opposite families of approaches.
On the whole, there is a set of three models of nature which are in competition.
As can be seen on the table, these models of nature are also models of society.
As a matter of fact, statements on natural environments are so pervasive that they have major consequences on the way societies are organized.
This is particularly true about space.
Conceptions of inhabited space clearly differ from one model to another.
If we now more specifically focus on models compatible with ecological awareness, it can be noticed that they stand in profound opposition.
Here can be found two irreconcilable approaches to the organization of social life. ‘The Limits to Growth’, that is the Meadows’ report published in 1972, is a good example of neo-naturalist interpretation.
It appeared in the wake of a long intellectual tradition beginning with Thomas Malthus, the famous 19th Century demographer and theologian.
The basic idea is that when natural resources are limited, population cannot increase without provoking massive starvation and other disasters.
According to a neo-naturalist point of view, there is also a moral dimension as the graph shows.
The neo-naturalist paradigm always assumes that intrinsic moral values are conveyed by natural beings, be they animals, plants or minerals.
The implementation of these values contributes to creating a natural order which man has disrupted.
In this regard, the issue of biodiversity clearly is critical.
Some biologists warn of an anthropic seventh extinction, which might affect from 15% to 50% of existing species.
It is also true that back in the Palaeolithic era, humans, in fact, destroyed many species.
For instance, scientists have good reasons to believe that forests were destroyed thousands of years ago by the first Palaeolithic societies living in Central Australia.
And who transformed a vast area into desert.
However, the four last extinctions annihilated more than 50% of previously existing species, with the Permian extinction --the fifth-- eliminating 70% of terrestrial species and 95% of marine life 
250 million years ago.
The difference this time does not originate in the quantity of species projected to be lost, nor in the pace of extinction.
Most extinctions, such as the disappearance of the dinosaurs during the Cretaceous, occurred as a result of a sudden catastrophic event such as a volcanic eruption or a meteorite.
The difference this time comes from man's supposed guilt.
Keeping the same perspective, the very notion of ‘climatic disturbance’ is disputable.
It's supposed that before human intervention, the climate was both stable and consistent, obeying rules, the antonym of disturbance being organization or order.
Debates on climate are clearly marked by the weight of neo-naturalism.
Roger Pielke Jr. assumed that once controversial scientific research meets controversial political issues, the schola’s role tends to switch to the stance of an activist.
He detected this tendency in many documents overestimating our level of knowledge, and not only trying to blame human impact for climatic warming, but also any orientation towards development.
The idea of sustainable development progressively appeared in the 1970’’s and 1980’s.
Gro Harlem Brundtland's text ‘Our Common Future’ released in 1987 by a UN agency devoted to the natural environment, was the first official political expression of the sustainable development orientation.
The term ‘sustainable development’ is not the title of a complete political agenda, but rather a general framework for public debate.
The main idea is that, if we want to make development sustainable, and maintain it as efficient for future generations, three pillars should be simultaneously strengthened: economic growth, social cohesion, and the preservation of natural environments.
For promoters of sustainable development, there’s no antimony between these three objectives.
Quite to the contrary.
As the graph demonstrates, they are all the more compatible among themselves, since each component includes a substantial intersection with the others.
Said differently, it could be argued that each of the three pillars is a particular way of saying the same thing, that is: the crucial necessity of considering societies’ futures as long-term processes supposes encompassing nature as a dimension of socio-economic development.
The sustainable development framework has also clearly identified the global scale as the one most relevant for addressing developmental and environmental issues.
One of the key issues in these models of nature is humanit’s ability to arrange development programs which can be efficient with a decreasing withdrawal of non-reproducible natural resources.
The graph demonstrates that bet about decoupling.
The decoupling process shows that despite the high level of unevenness persisting inside and amongst societies, there are significant tendencies in the World in favour of overcoming Neolithic logics.
An important and probably dominant part of human production and activities has already been the result of immaterial processes.
The economy of knowledge is growing daily, and it is easy to imagine a production system in which all natural inputs are reduced to recyclable sources, such as water, metals, soil, or non-limited sources, such as, wind, sun, or some day nuclear fusion.
However, it’s true that decoupling is just the first step.
In a post-Neolithic world, fossil energy will disappear, and the destruction of useful and limited resources will tend towards zero.
This era has clearly not yet arrived and the positive impact of some technological processes, such as cleaner cars, has been weakened by the simple increase in quantities produced.
Much remains to be done for the construction of a ‘post-lithic’ production system.
