Here is the experiment that defies intuition.
The ball seems suspended in the air.
We will see in this course that it is explained by the asymmetry of the flow around the ball.
It is an example amongst others that will be used to introduce the key-concepts of fluid mechanics.
Hello, my name is Christophe Ancey,
I am professor of mechanics at the EPFL where I also conduct research on the dynamics of flows.
I am more precisely interested in the dynamics of flows with free surface on strong slops.
I try to understand the physical processes involved in the flows of particles in a flux.
Hello, my name is François Gallaire and I am professor of fluid mechanics at the EPFL where
I do research on the on the fundamental mechanism that govern flows. 
I study more precisely the formation and the dynamics of vortex and their influence on the aerodynamics of cars and planes.
Another important component of my research concerns the deformation of small micro-metric objects,
- droplet, vesicles or cells - during their transport in the channels natural or artificial. 
Hello, my name is Marco Ramaioli.
I am lecturer at the EPFL and researcher at the Center of research Nestlé.
My research interest are flows  dominated by interfaces and divided media. 
I will help you understand the key-concepts of this course thanks to videos. We will present you both laboratory experiments and phenomena of the every day life.
During the first chapter, we will approach the physical properties of fluids.
What is a liquid ?
What is a gas ? 
How their behavior at the molecular scale helps to understand the macroscopic properties such as viscosity ?
The second chapter will deal with phenomena of surface tension and capillarity, which explains, for example, why a soap bubble remains spherical or a rain drop does not measure
1 micron or 1 meter, but a few millimeters.
During chapter 3, we will approach the notion of similarity.
Many flows in laboratory or in the nature are alike.
It is naturally what is used by the equations of mechanics that are valid to describe not only flows in ducts of small dimension such as blood in veins, but also to describe flows of very large dimension such as atmospheric circulation. 
In the chapter 4, we will approach the problem of fluids at rest, in other words the static of fluids.
We will demonstrate Pascal's law which is the foundation of fluid mechanics.
This simple equations allows to calculate pressure forces on structures such as dams or buoyancy forces for boats.
In chapter 5, we will introduce the mathematical tools to follow a particle along its trajectory.
In the next chapter, we will learn to make mass and force balances in order to predict the flows.
We will see that the pressure can be used either to accelerate a flow, or to overcome the friction.
In the chapter 7, we will see a application particularly important of the principle of conservation of momentum.
It is Bernoulli's principle.
The students like it, because unlike the rest of mechanics, they are simple equations without diffenretial operators.
This theorem allows to solve practical and various problems such as jets, propulsion or hydraulics with free surface.
Every week, besides the videos of the course showing precise points, we will propose some quizzes to test your intuition and your knowledge.
Through these exercises, you can confront yourselves to the key-concepts.
Whether you are interested in environment, biology, transports or industrial processes, this course will give you the essential bases to understand the world around you.
