Protected Areas Management
Dr. Geoffroy Mauvais 
There’re many ways to look at Africa but there is one picture everyone has in mind: that of its outstanding nature, of its fauna and flora untamed to this day.
All this exists today in the continent's parks, reserves and protected areas, but for how long?
Africa is changing, it's moving, balances are tilting traditions are fading, nature comes in second behind development concerns, which are legitimate, but often damaging to the environment
For African protected areas to keep playing a role in the conservation of this unique heritage, they also need to be moving.
More actions effectiveness, more transparency in decision-making, more results, and above all, more impact on the field, more equity, more legitimacy, more support of populations, locally, and also wherever citizens can work for the conservation of nature.
There you go, this is this course's objective;
Learning, understanding, and putting our heads together to improve the governance and the management of these territories.
Every week during 5 weeks, we will address a key topic, planning, governance, financing, important conventions etc.
We will talk about spatial planning, about surveillance, about environmental education, about gender, about ecosystem services, about local populations, tourism, climate, about marine protected areas...
In short, about everything you need to know to sustainably preserve these protected areas.
Sylvie Goyet,
Paul Ndiaye, and Paul Ouédraogo, will help me with this course.
Each week, they will share with us everything they know.
Several experts will also intervene, and share their experience, challenge our certainties, and share their solutions.
Each week we'll have videos, documents to read to dig deeper into the subject, some quizzes for fun, and an assessment test nothing too complicated.
And a good opportunity to learn, as a group.
Because during the entire Mooc, we will meet on the forum, to discuss, share, learn or teach, and I hope, develop a network of players, of "friends" of protected areas, that will go beyond the duration of this Mooc.
There is no prerequisite to register, only an interest for African protected areas.
So go ahead and join us for this Mooc.
See you soon.
A PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN ANDRE HOFFMANN,
ECOLE POLYTECHNIQUE FEDERALE DE LAUSANNE,
AND IUCN (VIA THE PARTNERSHIP FRANCE – IUCN)
THIS MOOC IS THE RESULT OF THE ACADEMIC COLLABORATION
BETWEEN THE FOLLOWING INSTITUTIONS:
IT WAS PRODUCED AS PART OF THE RESCIF
AND THE INITIATIVE OF THE EPFL MOOC FOR AFRICA
