Hi.
Today we will talk about the most frequent solution of waste treatment which are dumpsites and landfills.
Landfill is not a sustainable solution.
We don't really treat the waste but we just store it in safe conditions.
Landfill will create long term effects on the water.
So the first water or the groundwater, we transfer to our children the responsibility and cost to manage our present waste and to manage this water in the long term.
But the reality is that in most cases there are no other solutions and landfill is the only affordable solution for the next years and we have to build and operate good landfill in order to protect human health and environment as much as possible.
In most cases after treatment and even after incineration, we still need landfill to store the residues of the treatments in every countries.
These are not landfills but just dumpsites; here in Albania, in Peru, in Sao Tome, in
Morocco or in India.
We have the same problems everywhere: we have fire, water contamination, noxious smokes, strong odors, health danger for humans and animals.
Stability (inaudible) and environment destruction.
Such open dumpsites are still the world's most common disposal method.
This has to be stopped and can be stopped.
The first measure to take for a good operation is to close the sites and limit access.
It is important that nobody can come and the animals can't enter the sites.
Recycling should be made and organized upstreams in the town and not in the dumpsites for health and security reasons.
Another point is to reduce the surface of dumping of the waste.
Every area which is not use has to be covered and we have to limit the working area to a very limited zone.
This will avoid the presence of animals, reduce their water infiltration and reduce the production of leachate.
Cover of non-active zone is important, can be done with inox material or (inaudible) material.
In any case whatever evacuation system should be realized in order to reduce as much as possible the infiltration of rainwater.
Compaction is a key element for economy and the ecology.
Compaction allows to gain in volume in the landfill and this is also a cost reduction.
But compaction also allows to stop the presence of oxygen in the waste.
This is the best solution to avoid fire and limit the presence of animals like rats or insects in the waste.
No fire, no smoke, no air, no animals.
Compaction will also reduce the flight of the waste.
The best for this is to use specialized trucks like this one but the type of each is strongly depending on the waste composition and climate.
Compaction can also be done with a choice of the trucks path in the surface of the landfill.
For the environment dumping in high elevation will reduce the quantity of waste water or leachate.
The quantity of water going through the waste is depending on the surface but not on the height of the waste so if we are higher we will produce proportionately less (inaudible) waste.
For that, we have to ensure a slope stability with a slope of one vertical to three horizontal like this: one, two, three, for having a good stability in the outer flank of the landfill.
It is also preferable to begin each floor by building an external dyke and it is cover like this.
First we will build this dyke, we can cover it and then we begin to dump the waste which is out to be seen from outside.
This will also limit a little bit the flight of the waste.
Another important point is to reduce the flight of plastic in light waste.
This is possible by stretching high vertical nets around the dumpsite like here.
Or like here.
For dumpsites as well as for landfill it is possible and necessary to build gas vertical drainage, gas flue.
This allowed to burn the gas at the surface of the landfill.
This can be done very simply using stones and metallic tubes which can be elevated step by step with a waste.
Gas drainage system allowed to catch the methane gas and to burn it.
By burning the gas you also eliminate the very bad smell and reduce the greenhouse effect of CH4, the methane.
It's not perfect but very efficient to reduce odors and air impact.
Drainage of the water is an important point as well as for landfills and for dumpsites.
There are two very simple and important drainage systems to be build, even if not perfect.
Why is drainage so important in dumpsites and landfills?
The reason is simple and geomechanic.
If water accumulates into the body of the waste it creates a danger of landslides or wasteslides.
This (inaudible) all possible downstream dangers.
The first drainage is for catching the rainwater runoff upstream of the landfill all around in order to avoid that a big quantity of water enter the waste.
The second drainage is on the bottom of the landfill.
This is a simple reason for drainage in the waste every three or four meters of elevation in order to avoid the accumulation of water and risks of landslides.
These drainage can be made easily with stones or construction waste.
It's also possible to combine the water drainage was a gas drainage.
Realizing such dumpsite operations will largely reduce the impacts but we create two conditions.
Firstly you need a certain amount of money for that operation, machines and manpower and you need to define an engineer responsible of the site operation.
In a summary, we can say that the first priority is to organize and improve the operation of the landfill or the dumpsite in order to close the site and stop fire.
This needs to name and train a head of site operator and to decide a certain budget for dumpsite or landfill operations.
