Congratulations, you've completed week 4!
Let us quickly look what we have covered in this week.
We looked at biological biowaste treatment options, we looked at vermicomposting and processing with black soldier flies, we looked at thermochemical conversion of organic waste, but then we also looked at hazardous and healthcare waste, and concluded with E-waste.
In vermicomposting, we looked at the worm cycle as a start.
Here shown in this picture, Eisenia fetida.
And then we looked at the environmental conditions suitable for vermicomposting, such as aeration, moisture, also the need to be shaded and the daily feed rates of about 50% of worm rate per day.
We also looked at case studies, and looked how this technology is constructed.
Such as the example here from the Philippines.
And then we looked at the products of vermicomposting: the vermicompost, the worm tea, and the worms themselves.
Then we looked at another approach of biowaste processing using black soldier fly larvae.
First we looked again at the life cycle of the insect.
Then on how to manage the colony, and how to operate the treatment process.
And then we looked at the BSF products: the residue, which is similar to vermicompost and the larvae, which have a high protein content of 40% and fat content of 30%, and are a high value product especially for animal feed.
In the module on healthcare waste management, we started off by looking at the waste amounts.
Remember, only 15 to
20% is actually hazardous.
The rest is typical municipal waste, so segregation is a main priority.
And then we looked at how to enhance this source segregation by color coding, and the provision of containers, for instance for sharps.
Then, we looked at healthcare waste treatment options, mostly referring to this book:
"The Compendium of
Technologies for Treatment and Destruction of
Healthcare Waste".
We looked at different systems; autoclaves, but also incineration, and finally ending with the special pits of landfilling.
In the module on thermochemical processes, we looked at the different options and their different parameters: temperature, air, and retention time, but we also looked at the products from these processes and their quality.
After looking at the processes and their parameters, we also looked at the value chain, starting off with primary products, through to conversion, to finally the market; looking at different products of value, which we can sell in the market.
And then the module on E-waste, where we looked at the relevance of E-waste on a global scale, but also the risks of E-waste recycling and how this can be improved.
Stay with us for an exciting fifth week, where we will be talking about strategic planning, benchmarking city performances, looking at waste and climate change, and also the issue of circular economy.