Introduction to interplanetary trajectories.
I would like to start with an important definition, the definition of the astronomical unit.
It's the average distance between the Sun and the Earth
The orbit of the Earth around the Sun is slightly elliptical, with the eccentricity of 0.017.
So when the Earth is at its perihelion, this happens to be in January, about the 3rd of January, it's at about 147,000,000 km to the Sun.
When it's at the aphelion, the 3rd of July, it's at 152,000,000 km to the Sun.
And the semi-major axis of the elliptical orbit of the Earth around the Sun is approximately 150,000,000 km and the exact value of the astronomical unit is depicted here.
This is an artist's view of the solar system.
You have obviously the Sun on the far left, then you have the so-called terrestrial planets:
Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, small planets, and hard planets.
Then you have the next four planets, which are big gas giants.
So very different type of planets as you have close to the Sun, for a grand total of eight planets around the Sun.
As far as the sizes are concerned, 
Jupiter is about 1/10 the size of the Sun, and the Earth about 1/10 the size of Jupiter, so the Earth is about 1/100 of the size of the Sun.
Now, you have the so-called dwarf planets, and Pluto was a planet until a few years ago when it was decided that its eccentricity was so large and the inclination of the plane of its orbit with respect to the plane of the ecliptic, which is the plane of the orbit of the Earth around the Sun, was so large: about 17 degrees that it did not really deserve the designation of planet.
It was more probably a captured object way after the formation of the solar system together with the eight planets about 4.6 billion years in the past.
This is a chart of the orbital characteristics of planets.
Semi-major axis, obviously we have 1.00 for the Earth.
This is a definition, the perihelion, as mentioned, already 147.1 million km.
You see the eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth is relatively small, but it is not a circular orbit.
In fact, the largest eccentricity we have is for the orbit of Mercury, which is quite elliptical.
The orbit of Pluto, when it was still a planet in the solar system according to the International 
Astronomical Union, was even more eccentric than that; it had a value of 0.249 eccentricity, in fact, Pluto, even went inside the orbit of Neptune in some part of its orbit.
Now, something to remember also, the orbital velocity of the Earth with respect to inertial frame is only 30 km/s.
Now, in order to plan for and execute a mission to another planet, so interplanetary trajectories planning, we are going to do the following.
Normally it's a four-body problem.
You have the Sun, you have the planet of departure, which is obviously normally the Earth, and you have the planet of destination, let us say, Mars, or Jupiter, or Saturn, or inner planets, Venus or Mercury.
And then you have the spacecraft itself.
It is a four-body problem.
We don't want to handle four-body problem, and it is not really necessary, as long as you are in the vicinity of the departure planet, and the departure planet, the Earth, then the other objects in the solar system do not matter.
You are on orbit around the Earth, on a parking orbit, let us say, and then you give a <i>ΔV</i>, or you accelerate your spacecraft so that you leave the area of the Earth, and we will define in the next slide the concept of so-called sphere of influence.
As long as you are within this sphere of influence you can consider that the motion of the spacecraft with respect to the Earth is a two-body problem with the Earth as a central body and the spacecraft having a very small mass compared to the mass of the Earth.
When you leave the sphere of influence of the Earth, which happens to be about a 1,000,000 km in radius, then you are on a heliocentric elliptical trajectory, pretty much a Hohmann transfer from the departure orbit, which is the orbit of the Earth, until the destination orbit which is a semi-circular orbit, either inside the orbit of the Earth, which is the case in this drawing, or it can be outside, for Mars, Jupiter or Saturn, or a planet of the outer solar system.
And then, at the end of your heliocentric elliptic trajectory, when you get in the vicinity of the destination planet, you will enter again the sphere of influence of the destination planet.
And from that time on you can consider that the motion of your spacecraft, with respect to the destination planet, is a two-body problem, with the destination planet being the major attracting body.
You can forget about the Sun; obviously you have forgotten about the Earth a long time ago.
Now, for the definition of the sphere of influence.
I already explained the idea of the sphere of influence, sphere around each planet, inside which the motion of the spacecraft is considered to be two-body Keplerian.
Laplace determined a formula for the radius of this sphere of influence, and you have it here.
The radius of the sphere of influence is equal to the distance to the Sun multiplied by the ratio of the masses of the planet and the Sun to the power of 2/5.
Now, obviously the size of the sphere of influence will be dependent on the distance to the Sun, because if you have a planet which is very far away from the Sun, let's take Neptune, obviously its influence on a spacecraft in its vicinity will be quite large compared to the influence of the Sun, because the Sun being so far away.
So the fact that we have a factor R, distance to the Sun, is obvious.
Then the ratio of the masses of the planet and the Sun obviously has an influence, and Laplace determined - we are not going into the detail of his thinking - but he determined that we have the power 2/5 of that ratio of the masses of the planets and the Sun.
Here we have, according to this formula determined by Laplace, the size of the sphere of influence, the radius of the sphere of influence, for bodies in the solar system.
For the Earth, as you can see, we have about 1,000,000 km, and the further away you go in the solar system, as I mentioned before,
Neptune you have 80,000,000 km, so it's a very large sphere of influence, because it's so far away from the Sun, and it is a pretty massive planet also.
The last line, for the Moon, this is not so much with respect to the Sun, but with respect to the Earth,
66,000 km away from the center of the Moon is the size of the sphere of influence around the Moon.
You can consider that when you try to plan trajectories from the Earth to the Moon, although the case of the Moon is a little more complex than that, because the Moon is so close to the Earth and it has a relatively large mass.
So the concept of sphere of influence is much more usable for motion of a spacecraft from the Earth to another planet which is much further away.
For the Earth-Moon system you cannot really use that concept.
