Hello everyone!
Let's get back to spacecraft propulsion, and we'll look at how different rocket systems work.
Here on top, we have a simple schematic of a liquid rocket-propulsion system.
You have the fuel and the oxidizers that are being fed in the combustion chamber.
You need an igniter system if you don't have hypergolic propellant and oxidizer.
Then you're producing a hot gas under high pressure, expansion in a nozzle, and the nozzle is optimized in its shape in order to, on one hand, increase the velocity of the exhaust.
We know for an efficient propulsion system you want to have a high exhaust velocity, and also to manage the pressure at the end of the nozzles.
The most efficient case is when you have the gas pressure at the end of the nozzle equal to the ambient pressure.
Obviously, this can work as long as you are in the atmosphere.
If you are in vacuum, you can't get there.
But normally, for ascent into orbit, the idea is to optimize the rocket engine for it to work in the best possible way in some layers of the atmosphere.
For the Space Shuttle main engines, for instance, it was optimized to work in the mid atmosphere-- not so much at lift-off, not at the end of the ascent into orbit, but somewhere in the middle.
On the bottom, you have a schematic of a solid-propellant propulsion system.
You have the solid propellant that has to contain, as well, the oxidizer and the fuel in solid form, and the combustion takes place in the middle.
In the case of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motors, you had a star-shaped surface inside in order to increase the surface of the burn product.
Hot gas is produced, expansion in a nozzle, and, same as what we said before, you optimize a nozzle to work at a certain height during the ascent into orbit.
That's an example of the Viking 5C liquid-propellant rocket motor that was used on the Ariane 5.
That's an earlier generation of the Ariane rocket, operated in Kourou, French Guiana.
Now, this was using hypergolic propellant, unsymmetrical monomethylhydrazine, and nitrogen tetroxide as an oxidizer.
And you have the fuel tank on the top, the oxidizer tank here on the bottom, and both are fed into the combustion chamber, and in between you have the turbo pumps.
The turbo pumps are fed by some of the fuel of the oxidizers, that are taken here, fed to the gas generator, and the product of combustion of the gas generator is just fed outside, does not contribute to the propulsion.
Now the specific impulse of this system was about 350-380, so less than a cryogenic rocket engine using liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen, but still a pretty sizable specific impulse or efficiency.
Now, let's get to the Space Shuttle propulsion system.
In the back of the orbiter you had three so-called <i>cryogenic engines</i> with liquid hydrogen as a fuel and liquid oxygen as an oxidizer-- the center, left, and right engines.
Of course the oxidizer and fuel were contained in an external tank that was at the bottom of the Space Shuttle, towards the belly of the Space Shuttle.
The other engine that we see here, the so-called <i>OMS engine</i>, that are using internal propellant containing these parts, that was used only for on-orbit maneuvers.
This is a view of the plumbing of the supply of fuel and oxidizer in the case of the Space Shuttle main engines.
Here you have the external tank.
That's the top of the external tank; that's the bottom.
On top you have the liquid-oxygen tank, containing about 1,400,000 lbs. of liquid oxygen, and on the bottom you have the liquid-hydrogen tank containing about 230,000 lbs. of liquid hydrogen.
Of course the difference in weight comes from the fact that the molecular weight of oxygen is 16, and it's just 1 for hydrogen.
That's why you have this huge discrepancy.
Now the liquids are fed to the three main engines via 17-inch feeds, for very large pipes feeding the propellant, the fuel, and the oxidizer to the main engines.
Now on the left-hand side you have a view of the geometry of the plumbing, feeding the fuel, and the oxidizer to the three main engines, with fill and drains for liquid hydrogen and for liquid oxygen, here.
And this is where the fuel and oxidizer were fed to fill the external tank from the bottom of the external tank.
This is a schematic of the Space Shuttle main engine, the liquid-oxygen, liquid-hydrogen engine of the Space Shuttle, where you have so-called
<i>staged combustion</i>, as opposed to the gas generator that you had for the Viking engine we saw before.
Here we have the fuel inlet, here the oxidizer inlet, with a low-pressure turbo pump for both the fuel and the oxidizer.
And what is interesting is that the fuel is-- and this is quite general-- is fed in the bottom, in order to cool the nozzles.
The nozzles tend to get to a very high temperature, and of course the liquid hydrogen is very cold and is used in piping around the nozzle to cool it.
And then both the fuel and the oxidizer, here, are fed to the high-pressure turbo pump as well, for fuel and for oxidizer.
And the product of the combustion of this mixture of fuel and oxidizer is still fuel-rich-- it's mainly hot hydrogen, and it's fed into the combustion chamber together with the fuel.
And here you have the mixture of fuel and oxidizer that is ignited, and is expanded, then, in the nozzle to produce thrust for it.
The three main engines of the Space Shuttle.
So it is two-stage combustion.
The first stage is in the high-pressure turbo pumps for fuel and oxidizer.
The second stage is obviously in the main combustion chamber to produce the thrust.
Well, let's leave now the subject of the detail of how the rocket engines work, whether they are solid or liquid, either with a gas generator or two-stage combustion, and let's look at propellant needed for a mission to Mars.
Now on the left-hand side you have the Earth orbits.
On the right-hand side you have the Earth orbit again, after going to Mars, which is in the middle of the picture.
And we'll look at the various stages of a mission to Mars, where you go on the surface of Mars, then leave the surface of Mars to come back to Earth.
Now what you have to bring to low Earth orbit is ABCD, and you have the list here of these various components.
You bring, obviously, the ascent vehicle, the Mars Lander, the Earth-Mars Transfer vehicle, and the discarded booster.
And then, what you need to do is bring three of these components, BCD, which are Earth-Mars Transfer vehicle, the Mars Lander, ascent vehicle, to the Mars orbit.
Then you bring C and D,
Mars Lander, ascent vehicle, to the surface of Mars.
Then D only, the ascent vehicle, back to the orbit around Mars to meet with the Earth-Mars
Transfer vehicle, and only the Earth-Mars Transfer vehicle will be accelerated, to a certain ΔV towards the Earth orbit.
So you have to realize that each of these segments, in a mission to Mars, with a landing on Mars and then coming back to Earth, includes a certain number of maneuvers, and each maneuver means a certain ΔV and each ΔV means propellant.
And you have to remember that Tsiolkovsky equation.
If we lift off the Earth's surface, about 90% of the mass of the space ship leaving the Earths' surface is propellant, so whenever you increase the mass of the payload, including all the fuel that will be needed for such a mission to Mars, you have to increase considerably the propellants, to leave the gravity well of the Earth, and get into your mission to the solar system.
So it's very important to have, on one hand, a very efficient propulsion system with a high specific impulse, on one hand, and, whenever possible, what you would like to do is for these segments, the maneuvers 4, 5, 6, you might want to get the propellant on the surface of Mars.
You can't get that before that, but from the surface of Mars to low Mars orbits, low Mars orbit to Earth transfer orbit, and Earth transfer orbit to LEO, you might use propellant that you get from Mars itself.
That's one of the big subjects: on one hand, you want to have the highest possible I_sp for all of these maneuvers, for the highest possible, or the most efficient possible propulsion system for these various segments, and, if possible, you want to get the propellant to come back from the surface of Mars and the atmosphere of Mars.
Some general remarks about the propulsion system in space.
A maneuver in space is defined as a given ΔV and the ejection velocity in the combustion chamber on the highest speed, they both have a very direct influence on the propellant needed to perform a maneuver with a given ΔV.
Now, a propellant must be carried into orbit or further away, at a very high cost.
This comes from the Tsiolkovsky equation.
The ejection velocity is, consequently, a very important parameter in space propulsion systems.
Let's look at this picture here.
This is the Space Shuttle at launch.
We have five rocket engines, two solid rocket boosters, providing, in fact, the highest fraction of the initial thrust, and we have three cryogenic engines: liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen fed from the big external tank.
The two solid rocket boosters were completely used after about two minutes, separated from the tank were falling down in the ocean, and for the 6 and 1/2 minutes extra, for 8 and 1/2 minutes total, for the ascent into space, only the cryogenic engines were used to bring the Space Shuttle to the desired velocity, the desired altitude, for the beginning of its mission.
