<I> (voice speaking in different languages) </ i>
<I> (ring) </ i>
<I> (voice speaking in different languages) </ i>
Mobility, between movement, meaning and practices
What is the purpose of research on mobility?
The essential idea of ​​research on mobility goes far beyond simply moving from A to B. And this is true of all travel modes: whether it is a journey made on foot, car, plane, or train, you can, in all cases, imagine a line drawn on a map connecting a start point to a destination at the other end.
But research on mobility wonders what happens on this line, what gives it meaning, social significance, beyond being a measurable distance. it can be thought of by analogy to the relationship between a place and, for example, where we are now in Paris; we could give someone geographic coordinates: latitude and longitude, defining a situation, a place.
Once we know that this is Paris, you also know a lot of other things about it. You know this is the City of Light, the city of love, that it is related to the
French Revolution and its history.
Thus, a geographic position, a single point on a map, is enriched by a range of significant ideas in addition to this location, this architecture and landscapes that make up Paris.
The same approach can be applied to travel.
If we imagine the movement as a line drawn on a map, as well as a place corresponds to a point on the map, our role is to discover what makes this more interesting than a simple trace; can we put it into meaningful relationship with mobility, travel, exploration, commuting?
All these forms of movements can be mapped, quantized, be put into statistics but are also full of history; they enrich the meaning of the various practices which they are used for and are policies of all kinds of ways.
They are part of the stories on favorable terms.
So I think that research on mobility concerns all these issues rather than simply moving from point A to point B, and that's what interests me.
The three dimensions that make the richness of this line.
How the line becomes meaningful, socially important and interesting?
I will stop on three dimensions that make the richness of this line.
There is, firstly the movement, then the meaning, and finally the practice.
How is this line active, how do we build, how we will move there and make some experience?
I'll pass these aspects reviewed in turn.
First dimension: movement.
The first dimension of mobility is movement.
By movement, I mean simply to move in space, to leave a place to meet in another.
This movement may correspond to a single line between two points, or a circle in the case of someone moving in circles, or any other conceivable type of graph.
The important thing is that this is something we can map theoretically, one can calculate the distance, the traveling speed, and do all sorts of statistical analysis on it.
This is often how planners address mobility.
Some social scientists are interested in the statistical aspects, and quantitative aspects of mobility.
This is often how the government plans mobility issues: how and where people move, why do they move here rather than there, how many follow this path and how fast do they move?
Second dimension: the meaning.
The second dimension of mobility is the meaning.
Meaning is an important question that do not always take into good account the authorities and planners, with their thinking more technocratic.
It is usually more treated by social scientists.
The question here is: what does this movement mean for persons who perform it as for those who are around them and think about it?
Take the example of walking: what is its meaning?
It's an interesting question.
Walking had a particular set of meanings for example for romantic poets who, in the late seventeenth and during the nineteenth century, considered  walking as the activity of the solitary walker, usually a man. It could also represent a way of being in touch with nature. Thus walking gained moral value.
Whereas before this time, for people walking was mostly synonymous with chore, work, activity which we preferred escape from: we walked because we were forced to go to a place we did not necessarily want to get to, or that we could reach only with great difficulty.
Walking thus had two meanings.
Later, it kept on having different meanings for different people: and walk in Paris, in the case of artists, may involve wanting to disrupt the mode of organization of the city, to go places which are not designed to be walked there.
The artists reflect on ways to free walking and to challenge the designs of the powerful.
Walking has started to take a range of meanings of revolt.
Walking is charged with different meanings depending on location: walking in Paris on a sunny day is one thing.
To an inhabitant of Mali who must travel eight kilometers to reach the first water point from his village, walking takes a whole new meaning.
All these meanings are embedded in travel, and we encounter the ideological, narratives and stories aspects, so many dimensions that make so we can not reduce mobility to the simple move from point A to point B.
Finally, mobility can be thought on a larger scale, like migration.
Immigration is still a very controversial subject, and mobility is central to it.
You can draw lines on a map, you can draw paths, naming elements, do statistical analysis, but we all know that immigration is accompanied by a large number of meanings and stories associated with it.
In the UK, where historically we have longly debated on immigration, we talk about it with "overflow" or "flood" terms innocuous words and innocent in appearance, but which are in fact metaphors carrying along a whole set of assumptions on the places where immigrants manage to survive.
Meanwhile, activists who fight against racism and xenophobia may argue that immigration "feeds" the country, here we have the lexical field of nutrition, injects "new blood" making society more dynamic, more interesting and more cosmopolitan.
It is a phenomenon that must be encouraged.
Again, the meaning is very important.
Third dimension: practice.
The third aspect of mobility to which I am interested is the practice, in other words, our modes of travel.
Our experience of the movement. Sometimes the way we move and live our movement coincides with the stories and meanings.
Thus walking can it be seen as an act of freedom or as a hard labor.
Driving a car can be experienced as a time of individualism, a private space, or as something that increases our sex appeal, if you believe advertising.
Or it can be a moment of tension, as we realize we are being locked in a metal case propelled to 100 km / h surrounded by other people. Or you can live on the guilt mode, if we take seriously - which we should do - speech environmentalists.
So there are interactions between all these aspects: our practices interact with stories, our experience of mobility is influenced by stories and signifcations that surround it, without being always a perfect match.
Sometimes discrepancies are observed
Many philosophers, thinkers and artists have used these experiences to transform mobility in different things.
We can conceive a walk in a garden in a particular way that turns walking into a philosophical exercise, walking and meditating becoming the same thing.
All these dimensions of mobility, movement, meaning and practices, associate with each particular moment of mobility.
They also have a political dimension which is very important, given that they are all taken in the phenomena of power.
It is the aspect that I will address now.
Mobility and policy.
A holistic approach to mobility involves entering its political dimension, its relationship to power, which envelopes it in so many ways.
This applies as a resource unevenly distributed: some have access to it, others not, some have it under different forms.
Thus the speed of movement of a person can be closely correlated with the slowness of another; or a person may have the ability to move because another is immobilized.
The significance of movement and its political implications.
Recent events provide an example that made the headlines, particularly in the UK and the US: the peaks hours in schools.
These parents drop their children off to school or go pick them up, generally in primary schools.
What usually happens is that parents arrive in cars, that a number of accidents occur, that children are overthrown by these big cars, so this raises an atmosphere of panic in those moments.
It is women who are criticized because they drive big cars while this is not necessary and that children should walk more to prevent obesity.
All this is mixed with complex policy issues with moral implications of obesity, on the right and the need to drive big SUV in London.
And all these considerations are nested together.
These big cars are a danger to pedestrians.
Yet cars facilitate the very complicated lives of mothers, allowing them to juggle time and space in a way previously impossible.
This is not a simple story, but it is a highly political story.
This is a story about power, movement, meanings nested in the movement.
And these power relations existing in mobility refer to the three ideas developed previously, the movement, the meaning and practice are all three policies.
The move is political, which can be replaced ? Towards what destination?
How fast? At what frequency ?
These issues purely quantitative appearance, even scientific, have a political dimension.
We often see maps in newspapers showing some form of mobility, coupled with a disturbing news item.
The significance is political: who built the stories of mobility?
Who decides that mobility is synonymous with freedom, progress, modernity, of citizenship? Who decides that mobility, overnight, take the sense of transgression, threat, illness, flood?
All this is a political history, the question of who controls the senses we give to the movement is a political challenge.
The practice of the movement and its political implications.
Then there is the political practice that comes to practice mobility in the manner that is its?
The most striking example is the airport and the plane.
A traveler in an airport will cross at full speed all the controls, he can be repressed at customs or immigration posts, he can be stopped before he can even get on the plane, if he does not obey a set of criteria that airport personnel has selected as constituting good mobility as opposed to a bad one.
He finally boarded the plane, which, of course is divided into first class, business class, and economic.
This is one of the few circumstances in life where you are assigned to a class, a place to sit, where people sitting ahead have more air, better food, more health, while people in the back have a headache from lack of oxygen, fewer toilets at their disposal, less space for their legs, less of everything.
How the experience and practice of mobility are differentiated is here quite explicit.
And we could give many other examples.
These people are regularly checked by police since September 11, in western cities, or people from Middle Eastern countries are frequently arrested under all sorts of pretexts.
An expression that has been said much, circulates in American cities: "driving wild black" the idea being that a Black driving a car, especially if it is a model one which seems quite expensive, is ten times more likely to be controlled than a White because we suspect him of having stolen it or bought it with dirty money.
Movement, meaning and practice are part of political mobility, the whole being crossed by issues of power, domination and oppression reports but also by resistance, as people also use mobility to resist these forms of power.
The constellations of mobility.
The last point I want to address here is the idea that all this consists in what I call the "constellations of mobility."
A constellation of mobility is a more or less permanent structure, a more or less structured approach to the way in which the movements, meanings, and practical are articulated with each other.
My thesis is that these constellations vary according to history and geography. If we consider Europe in feudal times, we see that the mobility over long distances, is the privilege of a small number of people.
The constellation of mobility in feudal times.
If one draws a map of the feudal mobility, we see that the great majority of travels is in a sort of radius of 11 km from the place of residence.
There are a few exceptions, that are always coming out in the order: musicians, minstrels, crusaders, monks and vagabonds began to emerge gradually, transforming the feudal representation of mobility. It was primarily the responsibility of kings and lords, accordance with structures of controls in European cultures of the time. The power of control and regulation of mobility was exclusively in the hands of a very small number of people; the vast majority of people were subject to rules, were carefully controlled and had no ability to travel great distances.
The constellation of mobility during the Renaissance.
During the period from the fourteenth to the sixteenth century, there has been a gradual abandonment of this representation, in parallel with changes in agriculture and laws.
We see the emergence of a category of persons, vagabonds or homeless people, that were not attached to any land and were freed from serfdom.
It became possible for the serf or peasant, to visit a city of what is now Germany, to stay there for a year and a day, and accordingly be released from his obligations as a peasant or a serf.
Hence the expression "the city freed the men" ideally, it made them free.
Mobility was closely linked to this idea.
When we started to see 10 or 20 or even 100 people settling in a small town, say,in the late fourteenth or fifteenth century, suddenly appeared a new perception of how this phenomenon should be considered, which was presented as part of the nation, the state or the local community.
They began to give people passes of different kinds.
The passport originated at that time, not national, as we know it today, but as a kind of local passport.
In Bern, Switzerland, for example, people received the fifteenth century passes to certify their belonging to this place.
In the absence of pass, you could be sent out of town as a vagagabond or a beggar. If you went back there, you were caught and tried, you could receive a stigma on the forehead shaped as a star.
As a form of biometric control before the hour, with the idea that the body maybe the identity of registration place and that mobility is controlled.
The constellation of mobility in modern times.
As you enter the modern era, the nation-state begins to become the structure or the echelon at which is organized mobility.
The passport is a passport to cross borders, police begins to control mobility as a national rather than a local issue.
And migratory movements begin to manifest at a much larger scale, both by the number of migrants and the speed of flow.
With the industrial revolution is taking place the railway infrastructure and we see the beginnings of seasonal work. In the south of France, people come from all over Europe to harvest grapes at some point, before leaving. We begin to have a more marked image of the presence of foreigners in the nation.
And we see the emergence of new ideas in science: men no longer think they are the center of the universe.
The earth revolves around the sun now, transforming the representation that men have of themselves. Physics starts to theorize, modern law is developed, the citizen is defined as a person which can move within the nation-state, cross borders between two nation-states, as someone who belongs to a place; about the "non-citizen", it is no longer considered a vagabond, but as the other, the stranger.
In the fourteenth century, a stranger is someone who lives more than 15 kilometers from home.
When is permanently settled the Nation-state in the nineteenth century, there emerges the figure of the stranger as someone from another
Nation-state, and begins to surround it a sense of fear, moral fear.
We can study the constellation of mobility in feudal times wider, then at the time of the Renaissance, and in modern times, when mobility becomes an element of progress, with freedom, with technological developments, with the railway, with the exaltation of the Italian Futurists before the possibilities offered by speed and by the machines, all these elements being nested into each other.
The constellation of modernity today.
So the question is in which constellation of mobility we find ourselves today and which way it operates.
What are the meanings, practices and movements which articulate the twenty-first century?
We still do not know the answer to that question, but we know that it escapes more and more to the capabilities of control of Nation-states. So we find supranational organizations like the United Nations, the Schengen area, the European Union, various United Nations bodies, all of which are trying to regulate refugee movements and other forms of mobility in new ways.
There are also more and more repressive measures of panic, of threats. Mobility seems to be both vital in the world we live in, and a virus, it is represented as a virus, a constant threat of destruction of this world, whether through immigration or epidemics such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome, avian influenza, or swine flu.
As soon as these epidemics burst, airports are paralyzed, newspapers are covered with maps, panic wins the planet, and all that relates to mobility. Hence where this phenomenon come from?
This is a question that challenges the real world.
<I> (voice speaking in different languages) </ i>
