<I> (voice speaking in different languages) </ i>
What is the "turn of mobility"?
As part of my academic activities,
I am often required to travel to attend conferences and exciting seminars, give lectures, visit exhibitions, forge collaborations, and even co-writing books on topics such as mobile life.
However, these practices do not make me a special case, and for a good reason: it seems that the whole world is moving.
Young retirees, students exchange programs, terrorists, diasporas, vacationers, business men and women, top athletes, asylum seekers, refugees ...
All these groups, and many others, seem to be everywhere at home by choice or necessity.
Travelling the globe has become the modus operandi of these groups of individuals, very numerous, intersecting on occasion in transport hubs and communications, time to question electronic databases in search of their next car, post, air, truck, texting, train, bus, coach, car, website, etc.
The trip, a modern phenomenon .
The scale of the phenomenon is considerable.
Each year, one billion travelers cross borders legally, against 25 million in 1950.
Four million people fly every day.
At any time of day or night, 300 000 to 400 000 people overfly US territory, the equivalent of a city aboard.
Each year, refugees and citizens of the modern world travel
23 billion kilometers.
At this rate and with fewer physical restrictions, this figure is expected to more than quadruple in forty years to reach
106 billion by 2050.
If people do not necessarily spend more time traveling, they move rather more quickly.
On average, the time spent in transport is about constant in the world: about an hour a day.
At first, people do not move more often but use more efficient transport means, which allow them to travel greater distances.
Transport and tourism is the first industry in the world, both in terms of the employed population and regarding the global wealth produced.
This dynamic fast movement seem to be generalized as shown by the statistics available on no less than 200 countries.
In addition, large flows of inbound and outbound travelers is observed.
The world, "department store" of modern times
The view of the German writer and researcher Wolfgang Schivelbusch is interesting.
He notes that "for the 20th century traveler, the world has become a huge store of cities and countryside ", leaving aside of course considerable differences between different groups of individuals, which have not always free or regular access to the offer of this department store.
This mobility chosen, mostly at least, is the peaceful form of cross-border movement the largest in history.
Beyond significant hiatus, this trend had not until recently waned significantly.
Around the world, physical mobility has become a "way of life" for the rich and for some amongst the poorest.
Now, who says movement of people also says movement of goods transported often by these same individuals moving, either in an open way, accidental or illegal.
We should also mention international supply chains of the manufacturing industry, that rely on just-time deliveries around the world.
These forms of convergence of mobility are transforming economic and social life in many respects, that becomes in a sense "in motion" or "eccentred from home."
In this mobile world, many are the interconnections, complex ones, between physical movement and communication.
These connections are the source of new practices of fluidity often difficult to identify and stabilize.
Some describe the interconnections "dematerializing" insofar where humans, machines, pictures, information, power, money, ideas and, in fact, risks, are "on the move" and create and recreate new connections around the world, often at breakneck speed
The rise of the "turning of mobility"
The issue of moving, too rare for some, insufficient or inappropriate or inconvenient for others now registers at the heart of the existence of many people and  organizations performance, whether small or large, public, private or non-governmental.
Now this problem related to mobility, has become a central issue.
With this evolution, more and more authors invoke a new field, the "turn of mobility", a reading and analyzing key of these processes allowing to decipher the nature of economic relations, social and political relations, in the contemporary world.
The idea of ​​the turning to mobility, which makes its way in and by the social sciences, calls into question the analyzes based on fixed concepts, static and "social structures" mainly a-spatial.
This turn is under post-disciplinary where it is beyond the scope of different disciplines to address the multiple forms of economic, social and political life and study how it is organized in time and through many complex spaces.
The analysis of the complex ways in which social relations are "stretching" across the globe generates theories, studies and methods to "mobilize" or federate analysis of the social order, which is in part accomplished by movement and contingently.
Overall, the mobilities are black box figures for the social sciences, which often reduce them to a set of neutral technologies, of simple aids the economic, social and political life which must be explained by more powerful determinants.
And when transport and communications are the subject of studies, they are often considered in separate categories, low permeable to trade with other spheres of social sciences.
Take a vacation, walk, drive a car, call: as many activities that social sciences simply ignored, although these daily facts are clearly important.
And in fact, the life of every day, social institutions like social practices presuppose complex patterns of space-time travel.
Mobilities depending on systems
Without a "system", indispensable conditions of travel, there is no mobility.
With these systems, it is predicted that the trip will indeed take place, that the message will be issued and the package delivered, that family members will gather.
They allow to anticipate the repetition of movement, relatively risk-free.
Ticketing, supply of gasoline, addresses, security protocols, websites, money transfer systems, tours, etc., are all systems that populate the modern world.
Repetitive and guarantors of repetition, they give us the impression it is natural to travel to find one's family or friends.
For individuals, the ability to move and move objects depends on their access to relatively safe systems, regulated and devoided of risks.
A number of systems have played a key role and experienced an impressive growth in the 1840s, era of the construction of the first railway in England.
These include, in 1841, the first "tour" the first national postal service, the invention of photography in France and England, the construction of the first railway hotel, and the first crossing of the Atlantic with a steamer: many innovations that appeared in the space of one or two years.
In no time, an extraordinary series of mobility systems emerged.
And of course, the 20th century brought its new systems: car, telephone, airplane, high-speed rail, electricity, modern urban networks, mobile phones, etc.
The fragility of a system
The 21st century systems are distinguished by a number of common characteristics: gaining in complexity, they consist of many elements and are based on know-how often sharp.
Their interdependence going crescendo, the organization of an individual trip now requires the use of a whole coherent and interconnected systems.
Furthermore, since about the 1970s, these systems are increasingly dependent on IT and specialized software in particular.
Finally, and this is not without a problem, many of these systems, because of the very fact of their interdependence, are exposed to what is customarily called "normal accidents" that may occur from time to time, given the close integration of this set of systems.
So while lifestyles stand out, stand out from each other, they are paradoxically increasingly dependent on the operation of these systems.
Because of their dispersion in space, meeting others - parents, friends or colleagues - involves a still greater coordination and to navigate between these different systems.
Systems that need to be deployed, operated, and on which we can rely to anticipate.
In a word, individualization and dependence towards relation systems are two sides of the turn of mobility.
<I> (voice speaking in different languages) </ i>
