Major mobile I'll talk to you today are people who travel frequently recurrently as part of the exercise of their employment.
It's about long distance commuting, round trips between home and work and it also addresses bi-residentiality: people who have a foothold in a city, for example, next to which they have their jobs and will return every week, every weekend in the main home.
The issue, ultimately, for these people will be to combine the exercise of a professional activity on one side and then the anchors, habits, preferences of family side, on the other side.
Today, long-distance commuting for professional reasons tend to increase.
This is seen, both in long distance commuting than in the bi-residentiality.
And so the question is why is it increasing?
The first reason we can invoke is already, the improvment of the transport supply with trains of high-speed lines, a transport offer to the road level which is also better and of course, the low cost aviation that can goto towns far enough quite regularly for actually rather little costs and time.
Then we can look to each of the sides of this movement we are talking about, the housing side and the employment side.
The job market is becoming more specialized both in terms of the nature of jobs than of localizations with areas where there are a lot of jobs, other areas where there is little or not at all
This is the first point.
Second point, there is more and more fixed-term contracts.
That is to say that a lot of change.
You can work in one place for a period of time which can be relatively short and then having to change your working location.
The third reason is obviously the unemployment and thus a difficulty to find a job that will cause some people to have to look for jobs farther from home sometimes.
Long distance commuting or all of these mobilities for professional reasons, if they increase, it is not only because of work-related factors, but it is also, at the other end of the chain, on the housing side, for reasons related to anchorages.
To change housing, it is primarily changing all short and to live in a place, is to develop there anchors it is meeting people, having a social network, family, friends having habits, appropriating ultimately these places.
There is therefore a certain inertia vis-a-vis of this change of residential location.
The second point is that, obviously, a pair of dual-income will have to manage two places of different professional activities, so there is not a residential location which will be optimal or perfect, which will help to minimize the travel time between home and work.
If we return to these anchors developed around the dwelling place, we can broadened a little this question of anchorage to habits ....
This is related to the living comfort.
You will find in your choice of accommodation a place where not only will you feel good it can be declined by the inter-se which is a preference that people have to live in places where other people are like you, from a cultural point of view, from a social point of view, etc ....
This is what created segregation.
Chosing a location is referring to anchors, habits we have.
Anchors that are social, family, but also anchors which can be institutional or cultural.
We can give the example of people, borderers, who are in a given country, who will want to stay in that said country even if they have to make a long distance to work in another country.
On the other side of the border, sometimes these movements can last an hour and a half, two hours, daily.
All this to finally ensure benchmarks and anchors which are institutional or cultural and that will eventually enable them to better live changes that may be related to their situation.
We see that eventually this commuting, this bi-residentiality is the result of a certain number of arrangements that we will be required to make to finally manage space and time.
If we want to try to ask the question of the reason of the increase of the mobility, of these great mobility for professional reasons we can try to broaden somewhat the approach we have on the concept of mobility.
Mobility is not a movement in space.
We see that people will have preferences which are of social or economic order and which will intervene in their choice of residential location.
So to understand the bi-residentiality we must also look at this.
Finally watching the elements and the social dimension which is associated with spatial mobility.
If we synthese a little what we said earlier, we realize that highly mobile people in space, will be people who will sometimes be induced to make the choice refereed in favor of a greater mobility for professional reasons to ensure the anchors they have at the residential level.
Finally, spatially mobile people can be people who are socially not very mobile. who do not want change, who do not want to confront otherness, to something different. from what they know currently.
So that's what's interesting about this idea, it is that major mobilities develop themselves, but they do not develop at the expense of anchors.
Major mobile are sometimes great sedentary.
The high mobility increases but at the same time sedentary lifestyle does not decrease.
Local anchors do not decrease.
Another point that goes in that direction is the idea that we will not be able to change so fast in residential location as we will change jobs.
The more the labor market requires flexibility, the more high is unemployment, the more great will be the difficulty to finding another job so we will be required to lengthen the distance between home and work and we will have a possible choice to be at the place of residence.
One imagines easily to accept long distances commuting if it is to make a career, to get a better paying job, to finally have a better work situation but we realize that increasingly, these large mobilities for professional reasons are not related to an improvement in the professional situation, they are intended to prevent occupational downgrading, this is to avoid unemployment that we will be led to sometimes do these great mobilities.
To avoid unemployment and to ensure the other way a number of anchors which are linked to a comfort life and which will enable the individual or the person to find a personal balance.
From that point, it begs the question if the people which are great mobile are people who live it well.
It begs the question of inequalities related to major mobilities.
Compared to this, the literature on inequality of mobility invites us to watch not the differences between people which are mobile and those that are not, but rather the differences between people who can be mobile and those who are not.
We, what we have done in relation to that issue, in research on professional mobilities a search called Job-Mob we watched both the actual behavior of people: are they mobile?
Are they great mobile or not?
Who are the people in each of these two situations?
Can people be great mobile or not?
Do people want to be great mobile or not?
This power, this will and do is ultimately associated to this concept of motility, developed by Vincent Kaufman, since power is approached on the basis of access and skills so contextual access: is there any rail lines,
Is there a nearby highway? and personal access: does the person have a car?
Does the person have season tickets?
And skills to mobility.
What can it be as a skill, it will be to have the ease to read maps, to orient oneself in space.
It will be the capacity to occupy one's time of transport, namely manage uncertainties or changes for example when there are problems in transport or traffic jams, etc.
Being able to organize time against these contingencies.
All this is a number of skills that we will look within the idea of ​​power.
Can we be more mobile?
All that, we looked at it on the basis of data that are panel data.
Panel data, is data that has been collected on two different dates for the same individuals.
People were interviewed in 2007 and were re-interviewed in 2011.
One could thus study the changes.
The other characteristic of the database that was used is that it is European.
So we looked at once what was going on in Spain
France, Switzerland and Germany.
If we look at the skills of mobility or the possibility that people have to move through the access and skills, we note that there are differences on an economic level between the wealthiest and the poorest.
Differences also at the social level between those who have levels of training that are the best and the other and differences between men and women.
On the other hand, what is more surprising, people who have the most power, who can be the most mobile are not those which are the most mobile.
There is no link between the ability to move and the fact of moving.
On the contrary, what you notice is that to have the best chance of moving will be associated with a more comfortable mobility.
People who are mobile will live the best.
Note that through a number of questions we asked about comfort and how people finally lived this move.
We can see that those who have the best capabilities, skills and access live it better.
So it does not respond fully to the question of inequality.
If we look at actual behaviors, we have a very wide variety of profiles among great mobile and what will allow us to speak of inequality is when we're going to see, to watch speeches that the people make of these great mobilities.
If asked whether they wish to be mobile, we will be able to cross these elements with the capabilities of these people to be mobile or not.
What we noticed is that if one says to be ready to be mobile one will in the short or medium term effectively, become one.
On the other hand, there is a decorrelation, an imbalance, a gap that is made, between people that can and people who want.
We have different profiles of many people who can and who want a lot. of people who are very motile.
So with a mobility capital that is very high and that will have facilities to move and will move.
There are also people who have a high potential and a weak will: people who decide not to move long distance while they have the capabilities or access.
Conversely, there are people who are ready for major mobile but have a chance to do it that is very low.
This is the category of the population that interests us most as regards of inequalities since these are people who declare themselves ready to move, but have low capacities and access and so may ill-live it or that perhaps, it begs the question at least, are forced into these mobilities.
If we finally look at those people, we realize that these are people who are either unemployed or are in a position of being potentially unemployed or have lived in unemployment shortly although ultimately it seems unemployment will have a major impact on the possibility of becoming major mobile.
This is something we spotted a lot in Spain since you see that the investigation was made between 2007 and 2011, in 2007 and 2011 so right before and after - after this is not very sur - the economic crisis.
We realize that people's abilities finally have changed relatively little in terms of access to skills on the contrary, the will of the people to move exploded.
There are lots of people who declare their readiness to long distance commuting or to be bi-resident even while they are in social and economic situations that are difficult.
Finally, the complexity of these arrangements in space between home and workplace will lead to periods during which people will be long-distance commuters or will be major mobile.
Those periods can be short or long and again what can be observed in the survey on these two dates, is that people who wished not to remain mobile in 2007 sometimes still are.
Those who declared themselves quite willing to stay mobile no longer are.
There is a shift being created between discourse and practice.
And this difference is interesting.
We realize that people who live the best mobility who are in the most favorable situations are the people who will have the most ease to stop, to stop the situation of great mobility.
Again, in the long term, we see that there are major inequalities in terms of management of these great mobilities.
What we can say with respect to these great mobilities, is that there is a risk of developing today a high mobility standard, a need a need to be great mobile to survive socially or to live better socially.
This is probably against this need of mobility that we need to act.
It is obviously important to ensure the possibility of moving, to work on the right to mobility but through the results of our research, we realize that it is very important to work on the guarantee of a right to immobility, ie to guarantee people the opportunity not to be major mobile, if they do not wish to be great mobile.
This is something that is increasingly difficult in any case, over the period of time that was analyzed this is something that is strongly developed.
The mobility is not something that is good or bad in itself something that must necessarily be defended against or which must necessarily be fought but it must guarantee everyone the opportunity to be mobile if desired and not be be if you do not want to and then the guarantee to give people a way out of the mobility situation if they wish for it and to remain mobile if they wish.
Finally we see that there's a lot of different situations for people and it is finally to all these profiles of people that we need to focus on if we want to try to fight against inequality related to mobility.
