Objectives of this course.
First of all, this course may help you decide if you want to become an aerospace engineer, or an engineer in another discipline, but at least with some knowledge of the challenge of the design and execution of space missions, kind of a catch-all background for any engineer, or maybe become an astronaut, who knows?
But being an astronaut may be dangerous. Let's have a look.
<i>(audience laughing)</i>
<i>(audience laughing)</i>
This course is really an introductory course in aerospace engineering and in the design of the space missions.
The emphasis will really be on concepts.
I want you to be able, at the end of this course, to have a pretty clear idea of what a geosynchronous orbit is, geostationary orbit, sun synchronous orbit, what is a sidereal day compared to the mean solar day?
So I want you to have a clear idea about a number of concepts, and there will be a list of the concepts that will be provided so that before the end of the course, you can have a review of this list, that you can see whether you really understand all these concepts.
I want, out of this list, no concept where you cannot say anything, like, "I don't know what this is about."
The list of the concepts is a very important part of the course.
Trajectories. So this is not a course on spacecraft design, but on space <i>missions</i> design, and we'll be looking especially at trajectories, whether it's trajectories to gain access to the low Earth orbit, or to an intermediate orbit, medium Earth orbit, or to the geostationary orbits.
A lot of satellites go there and we will look at the strategies to be efficient, to reach the geosynchronous orbit.
We'll look also at energy considerations.
We'll try to design the most energy efficient mission to go towards Mars, or Jupiter, or Saturn, or any planet in the solar system.
So these are the important things. Concepts--that's very important.
Trajectories and energy management in low Earth orbit missions or beyond low Earth orbit.
Now, another aspect of the course will be the following.
I had the privilege of going into space myself on four occasions in the 90s, with the Space Shuttle.
Spent a total of 43 days in space, and I had the huge privilege of being able to be involved in two Hubble space telescope servicing missions, mainly the first one, in December 1993, when we had to install an optical corrector for the telescope, exchange the solar arrays, and do some other instrumentation or equipment exchange, and I will share with you the experience of having been in space, because it's a very special occasion.
Only about 550 people had the privilege of going to space.
I'm one of them, very privileged, and I will share this, so on several occasions during the course,
I will rely on my own experience and tell you how it is to be up there, and to work there.
The views, the impressions, I will share this with you, but I really want to bring space to you, not only the subject of the course itself, but sharing my experience and to help you in your space project.
