Hello everyone.
Very warm welcome to the course on space mission design and operations.
We'll be together for a few weeks and I look forward to delivering the course and hopefully you will enjoy it and learn something useful for your current work or your future career.
Now this is an introduction course on the design of a space mission and the various elements that come into a space mission in terms of energy, trajectory and how to reach a certain goal in space whether it's in the solar system or beyond the solar system or an orbit around the earth which is the case of most of the space mission whether it's for utilitarian purposes like earth observation or communication or precise navigation or whether it's for exploration and science.
Now this is going to be a concept course.
There won't be too much mathematics.
If you know how to add, subtract, multiply and divide, it's fine.
That's a prerequisite obviously.
There will be some algebraic expressions.
There will be some derivatives and some integrals but not complex maths.
It's more a concept course.
You need to understand concepts that are important in the frame of the space missions and if you have a good root on these concepts, this will help you take more advanced courses on space technology in the future.
The prerequisites are basically a bachelors degree in either science or engineering or medicine for that matter.
Basic knowledge of physics and especially mechanics.
The Laws of Newton for instance and common sense.
Common sense would obviously be required to solve the various problems.
There will always be quizzes and exercises associated with each of the lessons and you will have to use common sense obviously.
Now we have heard what we use to have as a logo of the course over the past for years and you have several pictures that illustrate sections of the course.
On the upper right you have the space shuttle, in fact, flying over the city of Zurich in Switzerland which is the largest city in my my home country and this picture was taken on a shuttle mission 114 which was the first shuttle mission following the COLUMBIA accident in 2003.
The picture was taken in the summer of 2005 and it was taken from the
International Space Station looking down at the space shuttle shortly before the docking of the shuttle with the
International Space Station and this picture illustrates one important section of the course.
It's about orbits, whether it's orbits around the earth or orbits beyond the earth vicinity.
We'll talk about special orbits like the geostationary orbits and the sun-synchronous orbits.
We'll talk about the
Lagrange points also.
The Sun-Earth system or the
Earth-Moon system.
We'll also talk about rendezvous, obviously when we have the shuttle coming close to the International
Space Station we have to execute a rendezvous with ISS.
It was the same with the
Hubble Space Telescope.
That's going to be an important section of the course.
The rendezvous in Low Earth Orbit.
We talk about orbital maneuvers.
What happens if you do delta-v, a vectorial delta-v on your orbit?
What will be the change of the orbit?
Whether it's in inclination, in energy of the orbit, the altitude or apogee or perigee.
We'll talk about all of this.
In the bottom you have 2 pictures.
The lower right is showing a space craft in the vicinity of Saturn.
This is the Cassini space craft.
It's a NASA space craft on orbit around the ringed planet.
Studying the planet itself, the rings and some of the 60 satellites we have around Saturn.
And on the lower left you have a rover on the surface of Mars and that's going to be another important section of the course.
Interplanetary trajectories.
How to leave the vicinity of the earth to go towards the outer Solar System.
Mars, Jupiter or Saturn or the inner solar system towards
Mercury or Venus.
What is the strategy and what other calculations we can make?
Relatively simple calculations to determine the energy respective of the propellant needed to go to various places in the Solar System.
We'll simplify the problem in the sense that will consider the departure situation where we have a planetocentric trajectory of our space craft in the vicinity of the earth which is a departure planet.
Then we have, when we leave the vicinity of the earth, we have a heliocentric trajectory.
Basically an elliptic path either to the outer or inner Solar System.
And when we come in the vicinity of the destination planet, then we can forget about the sun and we consider the 2 body problem of the space craft with respect to the destination planet and then we look into various situations.
Either go directly to the planet and land on it or possibly come into orbit around the planet.
We'll look at energy and strategy considerations in order to achieve one or the other goal.
On the upper left you have rockets and this is going to be the section of the course on propulsion on one hand and rocket equations will be derived or the Tsiolkovsky equation which will give you the change and velocity that you have if you use a certain amount of propellants with a certain efficiency of the propulsion system to go from one place to the other in space.
We'll talk about the ascent into space with a single rockets or with multistage rockets and we will derive the benefit that you have if you have several stages in the rocket and you get rid of the heavy element with empty tanks that have been used as you go up in space.
There will also be a small section on space craft system, mainly on attitude control because this is some what related to the chapter on propulsion because we use very often thrusters in order to control the attitude of the space craft.
That was a case for the space shuttle for instance and also for the Russian segment of the
International Space Station.
There will be a very small section on other systems on a space craft like the electrical power generation and distribution system but there will be no detailed description of other systems aboard a space craft like the data handling system or communication system.
This will not be covered.
This will be covered in other courses.
And in the middle you have an astronaut with a power tool working in the payload bay of the space shuttle.
It happens to be me on a space walk
I did in December 1999 on my last space flight on the shuttle when we had a rendezvous with the Hubble
Space Telescope and we did some repairs on it and this illustrates the last section of the course which will be on human space flight and especially I'll talk about space walking, about the life conditions on board the space ship and also when you are space walking and the various physical and psychological conditions you have while space walking.
I'll talk about the tools we use.
I'll talk about the robotics system that is used in conjunction with space walking to do some work in space whether it was the assembly of the International Space
Station which is completed of course or whether it was to do work on the Hubble Space Telescope to do either repair, maintenance or exchange scientific instruments.
At the very end I will talk about the future as well as robotic and manned space exploration programs and the future of manned space programs also.
With the idea of leaving the low Earth orbit which we have covered a lot over the last few year since the end of
Apollo program and going back to the Solar System, to the moon and to Mars and possibly other destinations in the Solar System.
That's going to be it for the course and I look forward to delivering it and hopefully you will have fun taking it.
Take care.
