Hello everyone.
This course is not on space law but I think it's still worth addressing a space law subject in this video: the Outer Space Treaty of 1967.
First of all, let's ask ourselves the question: Where does Space start?
Space, of course we know, is very high up there; where the density is nearly zero whether it's vacuum mainly.
But if you want to be more precise when you go up in the atmosphere, there is one point where you have the boundary between the atmosphere and Space.
And if you consider an airplane flying high and high the atmosphere.
It has to fly faster and faster to compensate for the lowering of the density in order to sustain a lift C equal to the weight of the airplane.
A Hungarian physicists, sir Theodore Von Kármán, determined that for a certain height around 100 kilometers, the velocity of an airplane to sustain lift, is equal to the orbital velocity and this has been determined as being the boundary between atmosphere and Space and the so-called
"Kármán line".
And the "Fédération Aéronotique Internationale"
- the FAI, has put that limit as being 100 kilometers exactly or
63 miles above the Earth's surface.
That's where Space starts.
And if you go above that limits, above that Kármán line, you are an astronaut.
So you go 101 kilometer and you have your astronaut wings.
Let's talk about the outer space treaty of 1967.
This is during the development of the Apollo program; and before the first moon landing in the summer of 1969, the Treaty is on principles governing the activities of States in the exploration and use of outer space including the moon and other celestial bodies.
As you can see on the map in green, you have all the ones that have signed this treaty; all the spacefaring nations on one hand and nearly all nations in the world
107 countries totally, excluding some countries in Africa and in Latin America, some in the Middle East and Southeast
Asia as well.
I will not address each of the articles in this Outer Space Treaty but just mention some key points.
The treaty in particular bars the state from placing weapons of mass destruction in orbit around the earth, installing them on the moon or any other celestial body.
The idea is to use space exclusively for peaceful purposes.
The Treaty however does not prohibit the placement of conventional weapons in orbit and we could still have potentially destructive attack strategies.
This hasn't happened and hopefully will not happen but this is allowed through the Treaty.
And also another important point is that
Space is accessible by all nations in the world.
No country can be prevented from having access to space; Whether it's for practical utilization or exploration.
Another important subject is that pretty much like for Antarctica, there can be no national appropriation by claim of sovereignty on any part of a celestial body.
Let's talk about the space debris.
The space debris is obviously a pretty big problem mainly in low Earth orbits.
Low
Earth orbit being between two hundred kilometers above the Earth's surface all the way to two thousand kilometers.
It's also a problem around the geostationary orbit,
36,000 kilometers above the Earth's surface and around that area.
Now the space debris population and density is increasing with time and something has to be done in order to mitigate this space debris problem and reduce the density of debris and the critical areas of space.
It's interesting to see that article 9 of the Treaty addresses the legal base for debris mitigation and for so-called ADR (Active Debris
Removal).
The idea is for nations to conduct space exploration so as to avoid harmful contamination and also adverse changes in the environment of the earth resulting from the introduction of a matter and where necessary these nation shall adopt appropriate measures for this purpose.
One important measure that has been put in place for mitigation of the space debris problem is that 25-year post operational life limit.
Which means if a satellite has a lifetime of let's say 10 years, and after that it becomes a space debris because no longer operational.
Then 25 years after the end of this operational time, it has to be de-orbited by some means.
Several institutions and companies are pursuing Active Debris Removal technique development.
The moon Treaty of
1979 has not been as successful as the
Outer Space Treaty. it specifically addresses the situation of the moon and other celestial bodies in the solar system or even beyond.
The idea being that have to they have to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes pretty much in line with the Outer Space Treaty.
One controversial point in the Moon Treaty - and that the reason why it hasn't been signed by a number of nations - is that it stipulated the moon and its natural resources are the common heritage of mankind and the harvesting of those resources is forbidden except through an international regime.
This obviously was not to the taste of a number of nations and in particular the states that are engaged in space exploration; at least most of them, United States, Canada, nearly all the members of the European Space
Agency, Russia, China and Japan have not signed it.
Now obviously in the near future, we'll have exploration the solar system by human spacecraft and Space lawyers are working on the subject to provide a legal frame for future moon mass and asteroid human missions in the next decade including by private companies like SpaceX.
