Towards the end of the Apollo program in the early 70s, the Soviets have not been able to reach the Moon by human means and they started to develop space stations.
And the first space station they launched was the so-called <i>Salyut Space Station,</i> the one that you see on the left-hand side.
It was launched in 1971, so it is shortly before the end of the Apollo program, and it was used until 1985, so quite a long time.
After the completion of the Apollo program, Apollo 17 in '72, the Americans decided to use the Saturn V hardware in order not to go to the Moon any longer but the last stage was transformed into a space station, the Skylab Space Station which is in the middle.
This is a relatively short-lived program between 1973, one year after the end of the Apollo program.
In 1974, there were three missions: one of 28 days, one of 59 days, and of 84 days of Americans who occupied the space station. in a way temporary space station for these three missions.
The Russians continued very heavily into the development of space stations and the successor to the Salyut Station was <i>Mir,</i> which you see on the right hand side.
A much more complex and efficient space station that was operated from about 1986 until 2001.
Then it was deorbited in a controlled manner to splash down in the Pacific Ocean.
So again, you see this development of space stations mainly by the Soviets and later by the Russians, and a quick step in that direction by the Americans with the Skylab program.
Apollo Soyuz that was a cooperation, relative short-lived cooperation program between the Soviet Union and the US with the mating in low Earth orbit of an Apollo spacecraft which you see here, and a Soyuz spacecraft over there.
The commanders of the spacecraft were Tom Stafford on the US side and Alexei Leonov on the Russian side.
The Americans had to install a docking adapter on the Apollo spacecraft to be able to dock to the Soyuz spacecraft.
That was quite a successful mission but it was not really a huge step in their cooperation effort between the Soviet Union and the US which came much later.
Space Shuttle. The Space Shuttle was already in the thought of NASA, the Americans, toward the end of the Apollo program in the early 70s.
It was developed during this whole decade of the 70s.
The idea was really to provide to all users a real workhorse for access to low Earth orbits.
Initially it was going to be for commercial payloads, for military payload,
Department of Defense and also for science and exploration.
It was going to replace all of the expendable rockets that had been used until that time.
As mentioned, it was workhorse for access to low Earth orbit during the 80s, the 90s and the first decade of the new century.
The program lasted a grand total of 30 years, from 1981, the first flight which happens, that was the 12th of April 1981, so exactly 20 years after the first flight in space of Yuri Gagarin.
John Young and Bob Crippen were the commanders of STS-1.
Then followed 134 missions in total, so a total of 135 during 30 years of the Space Shuttle.
The program that was remarkable in the sense that it was very flexible, it could bring large payloads into orbit up to 20 tons in the large payload bay behind the cockpit for seven people maximum, and the Aft Compartment with the three hydrogen engines.
It could do interventions on satellites or telescopes.
It allowed the Hubble Program, not only the deployment in 1990 but all of the five servicing missions of Hubble were only possible thanks to the Space Shuttle.
It also made possible the Space Station program.
International Space Station, the Russian elements were brought with the Proton rockets but all of the elements for the other nations principally the US, but also Canada,
Japan, and Europe were brought by the Space Shuttle.
So we had five engines, three hydrogen engines using the content of this big external tank, and two solid rocket boosters powered by solid propellant and they were jettisoned after two minutes, after the propellant was completely used.
The ascent into orbit lasted only about 8 1/2 minutes, so two minutes with five engines including two solid propellant rockets. and the last six and a half minutes under the power of only the remaining three hydrogen engines.
Of course it was reusable.
It ended it's mission with a glide, over Kennedy Space Center, Florida and landing on a 5km long runway at Kennedy Space Center.
There were other landing sites like <i>Edwards</i> in California whenever the weather was inappropriate at Kennedy Space Center, could land here at Edwards.
There was one landing at <i>White Sands</i> facility also.
And so again, quite a flexible vehicle, very successful in terms of what it could achieve
Unfortunately, more expensive than had been anticipated and had two major accidents,
<i>Challenger</i> in 1986, and <i>Columbia</i> in 2003, regrettably.
Now, together with the development of the Space Shuttle program, the Americans invited the Europeans and the Canadians to participate in the program.
And the Europeans participated in the development, manufacture, delivery to the US of the Spacelab Laboratory.
The idea of the Europeans, it was their first access to space with human means with the Space Shuttle but the interest was mainly in science.
They wanted to have a tool to do scientific experiments in low Earth orbit.
So <i>Spacelab</i> consisted in a module but we also had the pallets which could be located behind the module.
We had also a configurational Spacelab with pallets only supporting equipment, antennas, telescopes, various instruments.
And then the access from the mid deck of the Space Shuttle, you have basically two living compartments, the <i>Flight Deck</i> and the <i>Mid Deck</i>, and the access to Spacelab was via a tunnel which you see here.
And that is really the ticket of entry of Europe into human space flight and together with this agreement with the US to deliver Spacelab and operate it, we had the opportunity for Europeans to become astronauts.
ESA did the first astronaut selection in 1978, and I was privileged to be one of the three who were selected together with Ulf Merbold from Germany, and Wubbo Ockels from the Netherlands.
So Spacelab flew a grand total of 22 times with the Space Shuttle,
Out of the 135 missions,
22 of them carried Spacelab, either the pallet only, or pallet plus module, or module only for certain missions.
The first flight of Spacelab was STS-9, the ninth Shuttle mission in 1983, and we had also the first West European to fly in space, Ulf Merbold from Germany.
This is the view of the Spacelab module.
We can see clearly the tunnel between the Mid Deck of the Shuttle and the Spacelab laboratory.
This is the configuration with the module, but this is Spacelab 1.
In fact, there were also pallets in the back with instruments that were exposed to the space environment.
Here you see a bunch of happy scientists doing experiments on board of Spacelab.
There's quite a lot of volume.
I mean, what the Spacelab was bringing was on one hand, a number of experiments on the walls of the laboratory.
And the computer power, also, there were special computers that were used in order to manage and control all of the experiments on board.
But there were lots of manual experiments also biology experiments, life science experiments.
There were some animals taken on board of Spacelab.
It was quite a successful program.
It brought a lot of confidence in the US and in Europe in the ability to use such a spacecraft for performing science, although the missions were limited to a duration of approximately 
15 days at a maximum.
That was the limitation of the Space Shuttle itself, not having solar arrays, and using fuel cell to generate electricity, the missions were of course, of limited duration.
The contribution of Canada, also invited by NASA to participate in the Shuttle program was the <i>Canadarm</i>, I mean, the robot arm.
Quite a useful and efficient system, very well designed and built.
It was a six-droid arm, pretty much like the human arm with two joints on the shoulder.
One joint on the elbow, and three joints on the wrist, so there's a one-to-one correlation between the six droid's angles and the position and orientation of the end-effect of the robot arm.
But it worked quite well.
It has been extremely useful especially for missions like the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission where the telescope had to be grappled with a robot arm by the arm operator, after completion of the rendezvous with the telescope, and all of the space walks were supported also by the robot arm, with the platform at the end, carrying one of the space-walking astronaut to do the job on the telescope.
Again, quite a remarkable contribution to the program by the Canadians.
Between 1994 and 1998, we had this so called
<i>special Mir program.</i>
This is the beginning of a real agreement between Russia and the United States to use Mir for satellite experiments beyond Spacelab because its duration was much more than what was possible with Spacelab.
But also the development of hardware to make it possible for the Shuttle to dock on the Mir Space Station.
This is really a precursor to the International Space Station Program that started a few years later.
It allowed as well,
Russians and Americans to learn about cooperation in space for science and mating of the individual hardware.
So the cooperation between Russia and the United States continued in the 90s and an agreement was passed for really the building of the International Space Station together with a lot of other partners.
In fact, the grand total of the partners is 15 for the International Space Station.
We have the United States, 
Russia, Canada, and Japan and 11 member states of the <i>European Space Agency,</i> including Switzerland.
So that's not only a very interesting endeavor in providing world class laboratory in low Earth orbit for all these partners, but it was a really interesting experiment in international cooperation at a very high level.
Now in the left-hand side, you see the first elements of the first mating of the first two elements of the station.
We have Zarya from Russia, or the so-called FGB on the far left side.
And you have the NODE 1 in gray color, the first American element that was mated following a Shuttle flight that rendezvoused with the Zarya in 1998.
A little later in the 2000, you see the Space Station slowly growing.
On the top you see still NODE 1 and Zarya, and you see Zvezda in the bottom which is another large Russian module that have been brought by Proton.
So little by little, the assembly of the Space Station was going on and it continued until 2011 when there was a completion of the ISS at the same time as the retirement of the Space Shuttle.
There you see all the elements that constitute the International Space Station.
As you see there are a lot of pieces, some of them, again the Russian ones were brought by Proton rocket but all the others were brought by the Space Shuttle.
And right now, as the Shuttle has been retired, there's no way to bring another big piece to the International Space Station.
But those are previsions of a number of spares that were installed on some external pallets in order to be quite certain that the program could continue for another decade or so.
The forward portion of the Station, this is the velocity vector.
Towards the lower right is the so-called <i>US segment</i> and we have also the <i>Columbus
European Laboratory</i> and the Japanese laboratory, <i>Kibo,</i> with the external pallets,
Japanese external pallet and a robot arm.
And we have a large truss with solar panels.
This is all constituting the so-called US Segment.
In addition to the solar panels, we have a certain number of features here which we will see later on another illustration, which are radiators.
These are also radiators in order to radiate into space through an ammonia loop of the heat that is created by all the avionics equipment on board: the electric equipment and also the crew.
The Aft portion is really the Russian segment, so with Zarya and Zvezda, and a number of other modules,
In fact, some depicted in red, extra module that will be added over the next few years.
So this is excluding the red parts on the far left, the Station constitution as it was in May 2015.
This is an artist's view of what the Station will be in 2017 so this is after the addition of the extra module from Russia which will be brought by the Proton rocket.
By the way, there will be also an extra robot arm on the Russian side which is a European robot arm.
There's a cooperation between Europe ESA and the aerospace industry in Europe and the Russians to provide this facility for management of the equipment in the Aft part of the space station, the Russian segment.
But again here you see clearly the larger truss, the solar arrays and the radiators, some of them hanging down and the other trailing behind.
The velocity vector of the Space Station on this drawing is to the left and up, generally speaking, in this direction here.
Lat but not the least the Chinese Space Station which was launched in 2011.
This is a completely autonomous effort by the Chinese to have their own space station, visited by their own crew with their own visiting vehicle.
So you have the station itself here, the Tiangong 1, a relatively small station not occupied permanently but only visited on a few occasions.
And here you have their Shenzhou vehicle which has the re-entry part here, it has the over-all vehicle here.
And this is the service module of the Shenzhou spacecraft.
Again, a completely autonomous development of the Chinese.
And we had three Shenzhou visits to the Tiangong 1 Space Station in 2011,
Shenzhou 8, in 2012 Shenzhou 9 in 2013 Shenzhou 10.
Now it's planned into 2015 to see Shenzhou or rather Tiangong 1 replaced by another bigger space station.
The Chinese had clearly ambitions to expand in their capabilities to do space exploration in low Earth orbit.
They've had also space walking capabilities that was demonstrated, and their ambitions are quite large in this area.
Also, obviously in space missions outside of the vicinity of the Earth beyond the low Earth orbit to the Moon, and possibly to Mars.
