The first years of space exploration were done in a spirit of real competition between the two space fairing nations at that time, which were the Soviet Union and the United States.
In fact, toward the middle, to toward the end of the 50's mainly the military technology had allowed these two nations to develop rockets, which were called ICBMs - intercontinental ballistic missile - that were soon going to be able to carry, first, satellites low-mass satellites, and then human beings into space.
In fact, the first one who succeeded to put a satellite on orbit were the Soviets, and this is Sputnik 1. 
Launch was on October the 4th, 1957.
It was not really a scientific satellite.
The purpose was really to put some mass on orbit, and the satellite had antennas and it was beaming a "bip, bip, bip" all the time, which was of course tremendously irritating for Americans, because they realized listening to this bip, bip that they had been beaten in this, of course, fundamental step in the space exploration, which is the launch of the first satellite, the first satellite on low Earth orbit.
It followed relatively shortly afterwards with the Explorer 1, which was the first US satellite, much smaller mass than Sputnik 1, however the interesting feature of Explorer 1 was that it was already a scientific satellite.
It was launched on quite a high orbit, so it had a lifetime of 12 years, which was quite long at that time.
It had Geiger counters, and it discovered that a certain height above the Earth's surface we had a very high radiation or flux of particles of high energy - mainly protons, electrons, we'll talk about that later - and it, in fact, discovered the Van Allen's radiation belt.
The discovery was made through Explorer 1 satellite, the first US satellite, in early 1958.
Both nations obviously had interest also in trying to prove that they could bring a human into space, but before sending humans the idea was to send animals and see whether they would survive the space environment.
The Russians used mainly dogs, and they made a few sub-orbital flights with dogs on board, and it went fine.
And then at some point, November 3, 1957, so a relatively short time after Sputnik 1, they sent Sputnik 2 with Laika, a small female dog, on board.
There was one-way ticket for Laika.
It was not foreseen for her to return alive to Earth.
In fact, she passed away not toward the end of the mission, but a little bit earlier because of some technical problem with breathing.
But at least there was a proof that a living creature, like a dog, could survive the space environment, mainly the absence of gravity condition, or the micro-gravity conditions.
The Americans obviously were following the same path.
They were also trying to prove that an animal could survive in space, but they went a little bit beyond.
They sent a chimpanzee, Ham, after a few other animals that were sent on sub-orbital trajectories.
They sent Ham to orbit, and not only they wanted to prove that Ham was able to stay alive, but was able to perform some tasks relatively simple tasks, but this is in a way a precursor to sending astronauts into orbit, and obviously we have proven since that time that not only astronauts can perform a simple task but can be extremely productive: the best example is what has been done in the International Space Station today.
So this is Ham coming back from his mission, short mission, on January 31, 1961, having proven that animals can be not only alive in space, but productive.
Another first by the Soviets, the first man in space.
This was a big, big news and of course very irritating for the Americans who had been beaten.
Yuri Gagarin, a young Air Force pilot,
Soviet Air Force pilot,
27 years of age, was sent on his Vostok 1 capsule on the 12th of April, 1961.
This is "Cosmonaut Day," and it's really celebrated as well in Russia now, and in the United States, and in all the nations where we do human astronautics, we celebrate the 12th of April, 1961.
And the night from the 12th to 13th of April is "Yuri's Night," and it's a wild night in Houston, in Star City, in Moscow.
Yuri Gagarin, extremely respected by all cosmonauts and astronauts today; he opened for us the door to space.
One orbit around the Earth in 108 minutes performed successfully.
Not only he stayed alive, but he was in good shape.
A real hero of the human space program, Yuri Gagarin.
Now, the Americans were not quite ready for that and did not have the kind of rocket that would allow them to bring an American on orbit around the Earth, but they had pretty rapidly to prove that they could at least reach space with a rocket and with a human on board, and the first US astronaut was Shepard, and you see the liftoff of his rocket.
It was a modified ICBM that was taken from the military, from the US Army, and on top of it you see a small capsule.
This is the Mercury capsule, the first flight of a US astronaut, but sub-orbital: he did not go into orbit, but went up and down, but at an altitude of above 100 km, which is considered the limit of space.
Another first by the Soviets, 
Valentina Tereshkova, the first woman in space, June 18, 1963.
Quite a remarkable woman, and she had about a three-day flight on board the Vostok 6 space vehicle.
And again, the Soviets had proven that they were able to make a standing first, the first woman in space, 
Valentina Tereshkova.
Again, another first by the Soviets, the first spacewalk:
Alexei Leonov, in March, 1965.
This was also quite a step, because to go out of the spaceship through a small airlock, which happened to be a very, very narrow airlock, and Alexei went out and was giving, by voice, his first impressions of being outside the spaceship.
It was a relatively short spacewalk of about 12 minutes.
And then he tried to go back in the airlock, and the airlock very narrow, and it looks like it was somewhat of an inflation of his suit as he was out.
He could not get back in which was, of course, very embarrassing and dangerous and he had to somewhat deflate his spacesuit in order to be able to get through the airlock and back in the spaceship.
So Alexei had quite an experience and quite emotions during this first spacewalk.
But, again, a first by the Soviets, and he opened the door to spacewalking, which, of course, has been used extensively and is still used extensively for construction in space or maintenance of the Hubble Space Telescope, construction of the International 
Space Station or maintenance of the station now.
So space walking has become very common, but the first was Alexei Leonov.
Again, the Americans had to come quite rapidly with a counterpart, and that's the first US spacewalk, 
June 3, 1965, so relatively shortly after the spacewalk of Alexei Leonov.
And, as you see, all these early spacewalks were using suits.
They did not have the life support system in the back that was used of course for the Apollo program and for the Shuttle program and International Space Station.
So they could stay a relatively short time outside, on one hand.
They had, of course, an umbilical cord providing all the essentials to stay alive.
What is interesting also is that they are not holding structure.
As well Leonov, during his spacewalk, or Ed White, as you see here, are not holding structure, they are just floating free, but on this first US spacewalk
Ed White had a little gun, a gas gun, in fact it was spinning away oxygen, and he could use his gun in order to maneuver himself.
Of course it was quite tricky, because if you orient the nozzle of this hand-held gun in such a direction that the thrust doesn't go through a position close to your center of mass, you're going to start rotating.
But anyway he tested that, more or less successfully, then went back on this first
US spacewalk: Ed White.
