Let's talk about the pioneers in astronomy and celestial mechanics.
In fact, three centuries or more before the beginning of space exploration, in the 1950s, we had some bright mathematicians and physicians and astronomers who found the laws that govern the motion of natural celestial bodies like planets or satellites around planets, but also the motion of artificial satellites or spacecraft.
One of the pioneers is Tycho Brahe.
Tycho Brahe was Danish, and at the end of the 16th century he made very precise observations of the motion of planets, especially the planet Mars.
And he was using no telescope, but it was simple instrumentation, but very precise, and he was extremely careful to write down the result of all his observations.
Johannes Kepler, a little later, he was from Germany, and he used the data that had been gathered by Tycho Brahe, mainly on the orbit of Mars, to determine, and this was extremely bright and challenging at that time, to determine the basic laws governing the motion of planets around the Sun.
The famous three laws of Kepler, the first one being related to the shape of the orbit, which is elliptical or circular, the second law relating the velocity on the orbit to the distance on elliptical orbit around the Sun.
We'll look at the detail of all these laws later, but the last one relates the period of revolution of one planet around the Sun to the size of the orbit.
So it was a remarkable achievement at that time, on the basis of the data gathered by Tycho Brahe, to determine these laws by Johannes Kepler.
Now these are the two giants of the pioneering of astronomy and celestial mechanics.
We have Galileo Galilei from Italy.
On the one hand, he designed and utilized the first refracting telescope using lenses and not mirrors, and he did observations of the planet Venus and he saw that the planet Venus had phases.
He also observed the satellite of Jupiter, and obviously all of these observations were in favor of heliocentrism versus geocentrism, which was the theory of Ptolemy before the Copernican system came into the game.
He also determined the law of falling motions; he did an experiment, it is said, from the tower of Pisa in Italy, and he determined that the time it takes for two objects to fall from one given height all the way to the ground was independent of the mass of the objects.
He did not really have a theory about this, this was taken up later by Newton himself, and it was completely compatible with the laws of motion by Newton.
But he made this observation.
By the way, this observation was made again on the Apollo 15 mission, where David Scott dropped at the same time a feather and a hammer.
Obviously two very different masses.
He was using the fact that in the absence of atmosphere he could have a very clear determination of the falling time for objects of different masses, independently of the dragging atmosphere, which is the case if you do the experiment on the Earth.
And when he released the two, the hammer and the feather came to the surface of the moon at exactly the same time.
So this is a proof that Galileo was right.
Now, Newton of course is a real bright star in the determination of the laws of physics and mechanics.
On the one hand, he invented another form of telescope compared to Galileo's.
He had a so-called reflecting telescope, the Newtonian telescope.
This is an optical configuration which is very much used today, much more than refracting telescopes.
And he determined the laws of motion, the first law, the second law, the third law of motion, which are fundamental laws of mechanics.
And in fact, the motion of the planets around the Sun, the satellites around planets, and spacecrafts, manned or unmanned, can be completely explained and determined on the basis of the laws of Newton.
We don't need to use the variations of Newton's laws which Einstein brought: the relativity.
Whenever you have very high speed, close to the speed of light, or when you are in the vicinity of extremely large masses with high gravitational field, as it is the case in the vicinity of a black hole for instance, then you have to use relativity.
But on our course we are going to be following the laws of Newton, and that is enough to explain celestial mechanics for spacecraft around the Earth and the Solar System which will be covered in this course.
He also determined the law of gravitation, the force of gravitation between two masses being proportional to the masses themselves, and also inversely proportional to the square of the distance between these two bodies.
This is a very fundamental law discovered by Newton.
Now, beyond the pioneers of celestial mechanics and physics, the pioneers of the 16th, 17th, beginning of the 18th century for Newton, we had a few centuries, quite a number of years until we had the real rocket scientists, the people who thought about ways to expel mass produced by burning propellant, for instance, or by some other means, at the end of an object, creating a force that will allow the object to be propelled outside of the Earth's atmosphere and go into space.
The real pioneer in rocketry is the Russian, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky.
He studied all the theoretical aspects of propulsion using rockets, and there is a famous equation named after Tsiolkovsky, the Rocket Equation, or Tsiolkovsky Equation, which relates the increase in velocity of an object in space versus the propellant that has been used for a given time in order to produce this motion in space.
We will cover Tsiolkovsky's Equation in detail later in the course.
Robert Goddard, an American, did a lot of experiments with a liquid-fuel rocket.
Of course, solid-fuel rockets had been used, fireworks had been used in the past.
Fireworks are solid-fuel rockets.
These had been used by the Chinese and also other nations, quite a while ago, but Robert Goddard developed the theory, and also the practice, of a liquid-fuel rocket, which are obviously used a lot today.
Although solid-rocket boosters are sometimes used for the early ascent into space.
This was the case for the Space Shuttle, it was also the case for Arianne, and many other rockets.
So now we very often have a combination of solid propellant for rockets and liquid propellant, but development of liquid rockets was made by Robert Goddard, an American.
Hermann Oberth was a German engineer and a rocket scientist, who had the vision of using rockets for space travel.
He wrote a fascinating book in German,
<i>Die Rackete zu den Planetenräumen</i>, which means <i>The Rockets into Interplanetary Space</i>.
This was in the 1930s, and it was very advanced at that time where of course people were thinking more of using rockets for military purposes, but he was a visionary thinking of space travel, much before it started in the 1950s.
Wernher von Braun worked during the Second World War in Germany, a German rocket scientist, and he developed the V-2 rocket at the end of the last world war.
But he was picked at the end of the war by the Americans, and brought to the US.
He was initially a German citizen, but became also an American citizen.
He helped a lot to develop the US space program, all the way to the Apollo program.
He is considered to be the father of the Saturn V rocket, which is a big rocket used in the Apollo program, to take people and some equipment to the Moon.
