Space activities in the world: you have a map of the whole world with a color code for the space activities.
In fact, in green, are the highest levels of activities.
In pale green, you have for Europe and for Canada.
You have operates space stations, operates extraterrestrial probes, launch capability and operates satellites.
A little bit darker green is the case for Russia and for China.
You have in addition, manned spaceflight and by this, we mean, the capability to launch people into space, which is obviously the case for Russia since a long time, even the first man in space was from the Soviet Union in 1961
Yuri Gagarin; but you also have these capabilities in China, independently of the operators of the International Space Station.
In very dark green, you have Unites States because in addition, and these are the only ones to have that, is manned-extraterrestrial exploration because of the Apollo Program, an exploration to the Moon, in the 60s.
NASA is obviously a major space agency in the United States.
It's National Aeronautics and Space Administration, sometimes we forget the aeronautics.
We have the feeling that it's only a space administration but it has a very important aviation segment also.
Established in 1958 by President Eisenhower, this is also the year that the US Center, the first satellite,
Explorer I entered orbit.
This is the beginning of the 1958, a few months after the launch of the Sputnik by the Soviets.
The current administrator is Charlie Bolden, who happens to be a classmate of mine.
He was part of the group nine of US astronauts, that started training in 1980 at the Johnson Space Center Houston, and they were two Europeans that joined that group,
Wubbo Ockels and myself.
Here we see the mission directorates of NASA.
I mentioned already
Aeronautics research.
Sometimes forgotten, but an important segment, human exploration and operations, science, and space technology.
The budget of NASA has been pretty steady.
We can see the value for 2016:
18.5 billion US dollars, and the projection over the next few years is a very, very slow increase.
It's still about or less that 1% of the federal budget.
Now the NASA Centers are distributed over the whole country, the headquarters is in Washington, D.C., the centers a distributed pretty much on the East Coast, a number of them, but also, on the West Coast, and in the Middle states, you have the Johnson Space Center Houston.
Obviously a significant center for the human space flight:
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, that's where the development of the Saturn V rocket was made by von Braun and his team.
And for human space flight, obviously, very important, is the launch site of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida.
The landing sites of the Space Shuttle were normally Kennedy Space Center, the same location as the launch site for obvious reasons, but sometimes, we had a landing at Edwards, whenever the weather was unsuitable in Florida, or we had once at Whitesands facility in New Mexico.
The European Space Agency was created in 1975, on the basis of two existing agencies which were the European Space
Research Organization, ESRO, and ELDO, European Launch and Development Organization.
These two organizations that existed already in the late 60s, came together in 1975 to form the European Space Agency.
At the present time, we have the Director General
Johann Dietrich Woerner from Germany.
We have 22 members states; has been steadily increasing from the creation in 1975 until now, and our cooperation agreements with Canada, Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Lithuania, and Malta.
Now, each space agency has a mission and we didn't list the missions of all the space agencies but we thought it was interesting to mention it for ESA.
The idea is really to provide for, to promote for exclusively peaceful purposes, and I think it's important that everyone realizes that there is no military activity within the European Space Agency.
Cooperation among the European states in space research and technology and their space applications, with a view to their being used for scientific purposes and for operational space applications systems.
As far as space applications systems are concerned, there is normally an early development within ESA, like for communication satellite, or weather satellite, or for launchers, as with Ariane series and whenever the system is mature for commercial application it goes in the hands of private companies like Arianespace for the operation of the Ariane program.
But whenever there is a new development, like Ariane 6, which is in development now, it's within the hands of ESA, until it's mature, then it goes into Arianespace.
Now we have two sets of programs, the so-called mandatory programs, all member states participate in such activities; the scientific program is a mandatory program.
And optional programs like human space flight is an optional program not all of the 22 member states have to participate in that, it's up to them what fraction of the cost of these optional programs they want to put.
The budget is about
4.4 billion euros for 2015 and has also been pretty steady over the last few years, and slowly increasing.
Main contributors being obviously
France, Germany, Italy, and the UK.
ESA centers are pretty well distributed over Europe, although not all the countries have a center, but headquarters is in Paris, and you have five major centers, the major technological centers,
ESTEC, in Noordwijk, the Netherlands, you have the European Astronauts Center in Cologne, Germany,
ESOC, the Space Operations Center from where satellites and space probes are being controlled;
ESRIN, this is a documentation center in Frascati, Italy, near Rome.
And finally, you have the ESAC, it's an Astronomy Center in
Villanueva de la Cañada, in Spain.
So headquarters in Paris, and five major centers distributed over Europe.
Roscosmos: this is the Russian Space Agency.
In fact, the name was simply Roscosmos before, until the end of 2015, then there was a change of name.
Roscosmos State Corporation, right now.
Director General is Igor Komarov, and you see the budget is established over 10 years, and we see that is approximately
1/10th of the budget of NASA. Headquarters in Moscow.
Main launch sites are Plesetsk and Baikonur.
Baikonur has been used for all the Soyuz launches to send personnel into the International Space Station and right now this is the only way to get to the International Space Station since the Shuttle was retired in 2011.
There is a future launch site that is being developed by the Russians.
It's Vostochny, in the south-east of the country.
The idea for Russia is not to be depending on Kazakhstan, because Baikonur is not in Russia but in Kazakhstan.
And Vostochny should be operational in a couple of years from now.
Canadian Space Agency, this is quite an important space agency, within the frame of the International Space Station.
And we mentioned already the contribution also to the Shuttle Program in the delivery and the operation of the robot arm.
Established in the 1989, Sylvain Laporte, is the President; the budget: 483 million Canadian dollars in 2015.
JAXA, the Japanese Aerospace eXploration Agency established in 2003,
President Naoki Okumura.
And we see the budget of about
1.3 billion US dollars per year.
Tokyo headquarters, main launch sites
Tsukuba and Tanegashima.
And again, another major contributor to the International Space Station together with the Europe, ESA specifically, and the Canadian Space Agency.
Now, we have covered until now, all the agencies that are involved in the International Space Station but we have two other major space agencies and I would say, rising space powers which are India and China.
And India has an Indian Space 
Research Organization.
The original space program of India was mainly, to serve the people with telecommunications, and mainly, telecommunications,
Earth resources.
They have developed their own launchers, so they are able to launch their own satellites from a launch site in the South East of the country
Satish Dhawan.
India has been going beyond the practical utilization of space, and they've developed interplanetary probes; one to the Moon, which is Chandrayaan, which was successfully launched a few years ago, and more recently, a probe that was sent to Mars, Mangalyaan.
So, slowly, India is getting into space science and there are also plans for human space flight developed by the means of India over the next few years.
For China, we have the China National 
Space Administration, quite a powerful administration, and a very lively space program.
Also, remarkable capabilities in human spaceflight with the Shenzhou, the ascend and descend vehicle and Tiangong-1, and more to follow, space station on low orbit around the Earth.
Four launch sites, headquarters in Beijing, for the CNSA,
China National Space Administration.
Now, we have a number of national space agencies in Europe, specifically in France, in Germany, in Italy, and in the UK.
CNES is a French National Space Agency established in 61; in Germany we have DLR,
Deutsches zentrum fur luft-und Raumfahrt, also responsible for aeronautical programs, established in 1969.
And the Italian Space Agency, ASI,
Agenzia Spatiale Italiana, established in 1988.
The UK Space Agency is a little more recent, established in 2010.
As far as the human spaceflight is concerned the first three agencies that I mentioned, CNES, DLR, ASI had their own astronaut corps until the year 2000, when it was decided that all of the European astronauts are going to belong to the European Space Agency; we don't have any more national astronauts in Europe right now.
