In this section, we'll talk about the atmosphere, and the slow transition from the atmosphere to space.
Especially the high atmosphere conditions will be addressed here.
First of all, let's talk about the composition of the atmosphere.
It's mainly nitrogen, about 78% nitrogen,
21% oxygen in molecule form,
1% of argon, and then we have a very small amount of other molecules, mainly water vapor and carbon dioxide, which are in fact greenhouse gases, so they are important although they are small in quantity in the atmosphere compared to the other components.
In this picture, we have a depiction of the change in the temperature of the atmosphere, and you have on the vertical axis the pressure, on the left-hand side, in millibars.
On the ground, you have approximately one thousand millibar, or 1013 mb to be exact.
And on the right-hand side, you have the altitude in kilometers and in miles.
Now, we start, in terms of temperature evolution as we go up in the atmosphere, at the level of the ground, with a temperature of 288 K, or 15&deg;C.
This is the average temperature on the surface of the Earth.
Then as you go through the first layer of the atmosphere, which is the troposphere, you have a reduction in the temperature all the way to the tropopause, the limit of the troposphere.
And at the tropopause, approximately nine to 11, 12, 15 km even above the surface of the Earth, depending on the latitude, the temperature is approximately 218 K, or -55&deg;C.
This is the temperature that you read on the display in an airliner when you are in the low stratosphere, let's say 11, 12 km altitude, going across an ocean, for instance.
You read always the same temperature of approximately -55&deg;C.
As you go up, you have a pretty much constant temperature all the way to about 20 km altitude, then you start to have an increase in temperature due to the formation of ozone in the layer 40-50 km altitude.
The ozone is created by a dissociation of the oxygen molecule O2 into two O, and then one of the O combines with another O2 to form ozone, which is O3, and there is a process of balance between the building up of ozone and the destruction of ozone, and this creates this somewhat higher-temperature region, all the way to about 0&deg;C.
As you go up in the mesosphere, about 50 km altitude, the temperature decreases again, and then above 80-90 km altitude it starts to increase again, because of the ionization of the oxygen, mainly, and somewhat nitrogen atoms in the so-called thermosphere.
So this region is really a region of increased temperature because of ionization of O, mainly, and N atoms as well.
Now, what is the limit of the atmosphere?
What is considered to be the beginning of space?
It's considered to be at about
100 km altitude: this is what the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale is considering as the limit to space, because they are the ones who are recording all the records and the performance of either spacecraft or people going to a certain altitude.
If you go above 100 km altitude, you can be an astronaut because you have gone into space, and this is really the limit beyond which, if you go up, you can no longer sustain atmospheric flights, because the lift of an airfoil is just becoming too small.
This is the limit between aeronautics and astronautics: 100 km altitude.
Here we have a depiction of the variation of density and pressure in the atmosphere, and also temperature and speed of sound.
As we go up in altitude, the X axis on the bottom shows altitude in kilometers or in thousands of feet.
And what is interesting is to see that the density, of course, goes down as we go up, and roughly you have the following evolution: every time you go five and a half kilometers higher, you reduce by a factor of two the density.
You see, at 5.5 km altitude, you have that the value of the density is one half the value at sea level, which you have represented on the top left of the picture, and if you go to 11 km altitude, you have approximately 0.25 the value that you had at sea level, so, in fact, one fourth.
You see the evolution of pressure also, which obviously decreases, together with the density.
You have the temperature decreasing, as we have seen before, all the way to the tropopause, where it goes to about -55&deg;C.
Then it remains constant in value until you have the increase because of the formation of ozone at 40-50 km altitude.
The speed of sound, being directly correlated with temperature, because that speed is a function of temperature only and not of density, goes down as you go all the way to the tropopause, and then it keeps the same value.
Microgravity: these are the conditions that you have in a free fall.
If you have pure free fall, you're going to have zero-g or weightlessness but in fact there are always perturbing forces.
And the major perturbing force, if you're in orbit around the Earth, even at pretty high altitude, is going to be because of the atmospheric drag.
Even at, let's say, 600 km altitude, which is the altitude of the Hubble Space Telescope, there's a small atmospheric drag, to the point that the orbit of Hubble is slowly, slowly decreasing in altitude.
So this is why we talk about microgravity and not zero-g conditions.
You can have other perturbing factors, like the solar radiation pressure, you have the flux of the particles of the solar wind, which even for very high altitude will cause somewhat of a deviation from a pure zero-g condition.
Typically, on low Earth orbits, the orbit of the International Space Station for instance, which is 400 km above the Earth's surface, you have approximately 10^-6 <i>g</i>.
You don't have pure zero-g, but you have one millionth of a <i>g</i> because of the braking force due to the residual atmosphere.
