Let's talk about atmosphere and its transparency to various radiations.
Basically, the atmosphere is opaque to all kind of radiations except a pretty large window in the visible part of the spectrum, around 0.5 microns, or 5,000 angstroms.
And of course, we have telescopes on the ground observing and studying objects in the sky in this visible window, which is also the window in the electromagnetic spectrum for which our eyes are sensitive.
If you go toward the infrared, from the visible window, you have partial transparency, but your blockage, due to the presence of molecules in the atmosphere, mainly the water vapor, and the carbon dioxide, this region here.
So you could do some infrared astronomy from the ground, but obviously it's better to go high in the atmosphere, or better to go in space.
You have the very large radio window, which is, of course, used with radio telescopes studying the object in the large wavelengths, from about 1 cm to 10 m wavelengths.
You can see that the total blockage in the short-wavelength region, typically from the ultraviolet all the way to the X-ray and gamma rays, can be remedied, if you want to study celestial objects in this wavelength range, by putting a satellite, like the Chandra X-Ray Observatory.
And for the infrared, you have one of a few infrared observatories, the Spitzer Infrared Telescope.
The Hubble Space Telescope itself is covering the visible part of the spectrum, but of course being outside of the Earth atmosphere, it has a very high resolution; much better optical resolution than ground-based telescopes, and it also has a small window in the near ultraviolet and the near infrared, as well.
Thickness of the atmosphere: the atmosphere, as we have seen already, is rather thin, typically of the order of 100 km, as far the legal definition of the atmosphere is concerned, and the definition of the beginning of space.
But of course, as we know, there are still quite a lot of atoms, mainly ionized atoms, at much higher altitude.
This is a typical view, what you see with the naked eye when you are on low Earth orbit.
You see the Space Shuttle in the middle, and you see the Earth, and you see the very, very thin atmosphere, which is a very, very thin blue line.
If you are during the orbital day, when the Sun is above the horizon from low Earth orbits, typically from the International Space Station, the sky is completely black, because your eyes will not be sensitive to the planets and the stars in the sky.
As soon as the Sun sets, within a very short time, typically about 20 seconds, you see the stars in the sky, and it's a really beautiful view.
Now, on this picture, that was taken on my third Shuttle flight, in 1996, STS-75.
We had deployed, but not recovered, a tethered satellite at the first part of the mission.
We were ready to do the second part of the mission with microgravity experiments, onboard the Space Shuttle.
You see, on the left-hand side, the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and there are two parts in the back, and the vertical stabilizer, which here is horizontal, because we had the plane of the wings perpendicular to the velocity vector, which was to the right on this picture.
Now, what you see is the Earth horizon, below, and you also see the so-called "airglow" which is a thin line of green light, at about 100 km altitude, which is due to photoionization of the oxygen atom, and de-excitation which produces a luminescence, mainly due to the oxygen, somewhat also to nitrogen and the radical •OH.
By the way, you have, on the right side of the picture, the Southern Cross, under the two bright stars in the middle, slightly to the right of the middle, are Alpha and Beta Centauri.
Now, we have had a lot of very good pictures of the Earth, on one hand, by night, and also the airglow, which I mentioned before, this radiation effect at 100 km altitude surrounding the whole Earth, and visible especially when you have the Moon above the horizon.
Much better pictures taken recently from the International Space Station, because of the high sensitivity of the recording devices.
Beautiful picture, where you see the Red Sea.
You see Egypt on the left-hand side.
You have the Gulf of Suez, the Gulf of Aqaba towards Israel.
In Egypt, you have the Nile, and the Nile Delta towards the Mediterranean Sea, and you have Saudi Arabia on the middle to right-hand side of the picture.
Another nice view of the airglow above the Earth. and you have the Moon above the horizon, which always enhances the visibility of the airglow from low Earth orbit.
This is a view of Texas, taken towards the eastern direction, where you have the Gulf of Mexico on this side, you have the city of Houston,
Dallas, Fort Worth, and San Antonio.
What is really interesting on this picture is on one hand, the very bright nature of the airglow because of the presence of the Moon, but you also have thunderstorms northeast of Texas, which you see here, and there's a rare phenomenon which you can distinguish here.
These are so-called "sprites," which are a vertical emission of red lights above thunderstorms, which have been seen very rarely, but recently we had a few recordings from the International Space Station.
So a nice view of the Earth by night, with the Moon, the airglow, and sprites over thunderstorms.
