The Sun is a star, but it's a star that doesn't always have the same appearance; it has variations.
In fact, it's a variable star, in its appearance on the one hand and also in its radiation, in various parts of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Here we see a view of the Sun.
In the visible part of the light, you see sunspots which have been observed for a long time already.
In fact, we already have a recording of the number of sunspots since the end of the 18th century, which is quite interesting because we have seen over the centuries how the Sun has varied.
Here you see a group of sunspots, quite large sunspots, here a small group, up there.
And what is interesting is that the sunspot number is a value that changes with time, with a period of approximately 11 years.
It's the so-called "solar cycle", which traditionally has been determined on the basis of the number of sunspots.
What is also interesting is that the latitude of the sunspots varies depending on where we are in the solar cycle.
In fact, at the solar minimum the latitude is relatively high: about 25, 30 degrees, and then it goes down as we approach the solar maximum.
So this would correspond to the minimum, and a variation toward lower latitude for the solar maximum.
This is a depiction of the solar cycle from 1979 until 2040, and the solar cycles are depicted as 21 through 26.
We had sunspots respectively solar cycle maximum 1979, and you see that there is a decrease in the activity of the sun relating to the number of sunspots within about six years.
Then we have an increase in about five years, and a decrease in about six years, then another increase in five years.
So it's not perfectly symmetric, the decrease and the increase.
You see that at the present time we are in solar cycle 24 in 2015, when this course was recorded, and we are expecting a solar sunspot minimum in 2018.
And it will be followed by cycle 25.
Obviously, the number of sunspots cannot always be determined in a very precise manner, because if you have a very small sunspot, are you going to count it or not?
So there's a better way now to determine where we are in the solar cycle and see what is the intensity of the minimum and the maximum of the solar cycle.
In fact, what has been done recently is the radio flux: at the wavelength of 10.7 cm there's a hydrogen line whose intensities are varying depending on where we are on the solar cycle, and you can see on this graph correlation between the flux intensity of 10.7 cm in the spectrum of the Sun, versus the sunspot number, which is depicted on the right-hand side.
So there's a very good correlation.
Again, this is quantitatively a much better way to determine where we are on the solar cycle.
Now, it's very important to know where we are on the solar cycle, because depending on where we are there's a significant effect on the thickness of the atmosphere; respectively on the density of the atmosphere at a given altitude.
Let's take 500 km.
You see that if we are at a solar minimum this is the density that we have.
You can see this on the vertical scale.
On a solar maximum, you see that the density can vary versus the solar minimum, with one or even two orders of magnitude.
Now the scale that you see for the F10.7, the flux, or irradiance, at the 10.7 cm hydrogen line, doesn't have the same values as we have seen on the previous graph.
But it doesn't matter: the main thing is, you see clearly where the solar maximum and solar minimum is, and the significant effect, especially for the altitude between 500 and 1,000 kilometers above the earth's surface.
The effect on the density of the atmosphere.
Obviously, you can imagine that this will have an effect, and we'll cover this later, on the lifetime of satellites.
If you are at a solar maximum, you have for a given altitude a high density, which means you have more drag, and you have a diminished lifetime for satellites.
