Close to the Earth's surface we have a magnetic field which resembles, in terms of its shape, a bipolar magnetic field, typically the one that you would get from a magnet with a North Magnet Pole, and a South Magnet Pole.
Now, the expression of the amplitude of the magnetic field is depicted here as a function of the distance to the center of the Earth, and the so-called "magnetic latitude", which is pretty much like the Earth's latitude, with zero degrees at the Equator, and a +90 at the North Magnetic Pole, and a -90 at the South Magnetic Pole.
So you see, you have this factor
<i>1 + 3 sin&sup2;</i> of the magnetic latitude, and the square root of that times the B_0, which is the magnetic fields on the Equator, and at the distance from the center of the Earth equal to the radius of the Earth, so on the Earth's surface.
And <i>R</i> is the distance to the center of the Earth.
So this is an expression of <i>B</i> as a function of <i>R</i> and <i>λ</i>.
And here we have a depiction of this shape of the magnetic field lines in the vicinity of the Earth.
Again, I'm talking about the vicinity of the Earth being typically one, up to two Earth radii, because beyond that we have variation due to the solar wind, we'll talk about that later.
But this is the shape of the magnetic field lines.
You have the Earth,
North Magnetic Pole to South Magnetic Pole here.
And what you have is a set of so-called "radiation belts".
This is the inner radiation belt, and outer radiation belt.
These are regions where the magnetic field of the Earth is creating some regions where you have an increased density of charged particles, mainly protons and electrons, and they are moving to the North and to the South, they are reflected, due to the increased density of magnetic field lines, they are reflected, and they come to the North and they go back to the South, and to the North, and the South.
They are really trapped in these regions.
And these are regions, which are important, because you have an increased flux of protons, electrons.
Electrons are are not too harmful, but protons could be.
And you also have an increased amount of radiation coming from outside of the solar system, typically galactic cosmic rays that could be trapped in these regions.
The lower boundary of the inner radiation belt is about 550 to 600 km above the Earth's surface, so it's above the altitude of the International Space Station.
The ISS is not going anywhere in the radiation belt, but I remember when we had the Hubble mission, up to 600 km altitude, we had, sometimes, a manifestation of the effect of this inner radiation belt by flashes in the eyes, for instance.
Now, as I indicated already, in the inner radiation belt you have protons and electrons.
In the outer radiation belt it's mainly electrons.
So the outer radiation belt is not as harmful to electronic systems than the inner radiation belt.
The energy of these particles in these belts is bigger than 30 keV, and all the way to 100 MeV.
Now, this is an artist depiction of the magnetosphere, which is the geometry, and a region,
I would say, around the Earth which is dominated by the Earth's magnetic field, which magnetic field, is as mentioned before, pretty much like a dipolar, bipolar magnetic field in the vicinity of the Earth.
But it's significantly distorted when you go away from the surface.
Typically of the order of 5, up to 10 Earth radii toward the Sun, there's a significant distortion, in the anti-Sun directions also.
So on the left-hand side you have, it's not up to scale, but you have the Sun, you have the solar wind flowing in all directions from the Sun, and when the solar wind, which is made of charged particles, interacts with the magnetic field of the Earth it distorts it completely, and the boundary between the magnetosphere and the flow of particles from the solar wind, which is mainly protons, electrons, is called a "magnetopause".
And it's interesting to see that you have certain regions where you have the possibility for charged particles to get in the vicinity of the Earth.
Basically, the charged particles follow the magnetic field lines, and in the equatorial regions of the Earth we have protection against these particles, because the magnetic field lines are pretty much horizontal.
But in the region of the Magnetic Poles, you have a possibility for these particles, the solar wind, to get into the low atmosphere and create aurora, or Northern Lights, or Southern Lights, as we will see afterwards.
In the anti-Sun direction what is interesting is that the magnetic field lines of the Earth seem to be open.
They are open to the interstellar medium.
Now, this is a very nice picture of Northern Lights taken from the International Space Station.
On the upper right, you see one of the large solar arrays of the U.S. segment of ISS.
You have the Earth horizon, you have the airglow, which we mentioned before, at about 100 km altitude, and then you have this magnificent green light, Northern Lights.
Now, the Northern Lights and Southern Lights are produced by excitation of nitrogen, and mainly oxygen atoms, by the electrons flowing from the solar wind.
And typically the Northern and Southern lights are produced at about the altitude of the airglow,
100 km altitude and above, and somewhat below, but mainly above the airglow altitude.
It's nice to see on this picture, also, just above and to the left of the center you have the constellation Orion, with the three aligned stars of the Orion's Belt.
This is a view of the Earth from the International
Space Station, taken recently.
We are over the Indian Ocean: it's at night.
We have the landscape illuminated by the Moon, and we have a beautiful view of the Southern Lights.
We are in the vicinity of the South Magnetic Pole, which is somewhat on the right-hand side of the picture, and a very clear view of the Southern Lights, and also of the airglow, which gives you a scale of the height of the Southern Lights themselves, the airglow being at 100 km above the Earth's surface.
It's accelerated motion.
It's been taken so that you have about 10 times increase in the velocity of the Space Station versus the Earth.
We move fast, but not as fast as you can see here.
It's interesting to see the vertical line in the structure of these Southern Lights, which are along the magnetic field line, which, in the vicinity of the South Magnetic Pole, are close to the vertical.
You see also a lot of dynamics in the Southern Lights.
