In this section, we'll talk about particle flux in the Earth environment, and the effect on the electronic system which can be significant, and also on human beings, which is of course, a very important feature for human space flight, being on Low Earth Orbit or in the solar system.
First of all, we look at the solar particle flux observed on Earth, following a coronal mass ejection that we've seen on the SOHO pictures that these are frequent, they are high energy, and there is an enormous amount of charged particles that flow through the Solar System all the way to the Earth, following the CMEs.
And first of all, we have X-rays rather high energy X-rays.
Of course, they come eight minutes or later, after the event itself, because that's the time that electromagnetic radiation takes to come from the Sun all the way to the Earth.
Then, we have a pretty high amount of high energy protons modified in mega electronvolts.
We have a burst of these coming a little less than an hour after the CME, followed a little later by lower energy protons, but a large flux of these lower energy protons and they will extend all the way through, about one week, or even more than one week, following the CME.
Now, in addition to particles coming from the Sun, in the solar wind, and when we have
CMEs, a coronal mass ejections, you have galactic cosmic rays and these can be quite energetic.
Typically, we have ionized nuclei, and they get also trapped in the inner and the outer radiation belts.
Single-event effects are the effects on the electronic system.
It affects the digital devices, obviously.
We have to imagine these high energy particles that travel through semiconductors, and they leave an ionized track behind, and that can cause damage to electronic systems.
Normally, the SEEs are not that bad.
When you have a high energy particle coming to an electronic system, you can have a SEU, or a Single-Event Upset, or even a Single-Event Latchup, SEL, that can cause a total fatal damage to an electronic system.
Now, there are techniques for hardening of electronic systems to make them less susceptible to the impact of high energy particles, and this is, by itself, a total science and an important engineering feature for space flights, and this will be covered in other parts of the course, and in other courses in these series.
Let's talk about this South Atlantic Anomaly.
You have the Earth, and you have the rotational axis of the Earth, and the line between the magnetic poles is not collocated with the rotational axis of the Earth.
The magnetic poles are the regions of the Earth where the magnetic field lines are near vertical, so you have this geometry of the Van Allen belts, that differs from the geometry of the Earth itself, as a celestial body with the equator and a rotational axis.
Another feature which is quite interesting is that the local magnetic field of the Earth is as if it was produced by magnets not collocated with the center of the Earth itself, but somewhat displaced.
And you can see this on this picture where you have the inner radiation belt in this area, this is the area south of Rio de Janeiro and the South Atlantic, which is closer to the Earth's surface than on the other side, in the area of Singapore, approximately, the other side of the Earth which means, that on an orbit of 500-600 kilometers altitude, you are going to penetrate in the lower boundary of the inner radiation belt, at a lower latitude, and you are going to have a higher flux of particles, on such an orbit, in this area, south of Rio, than you have on the other side.
I personally experienced this on the first servicing mission of Hubble, which is at 600 kilometers altitude and by night, every time we're passing through the South Atlantic Anomaly, in the south of Rio de Janeiro, in Sao Paolo, in Brazil, then, we had sometimes flashes in our eyes, that were the proof that we had a high energy particle, penetrating into our ocular globes and producing these flashes due to so-called Bremsstrahlung in the eyes.
Here you have the representation of the location of the South Atlantic Anomaly, and again, whenever you are with the spacecraft at a few hundred kilometers above the Earth surface, passing this area, then you have a higher flux of particles, and you have also, of course, physiological effects that are more pronounced crossing these areas, than in other areas on orbit around the Earth.
Now, some definitions and expressions about the radiation, and also, the physiological effect of this radiation: on top, you have the RAD,
Radiation Absorbed Dose.
This is the amount of energy absorbed by the influx of particles, and a RAD is 0.01 J/kg, or 100 erg/g of material.
Now, the REM, the Roentgen Equivalent Man, is at times, a quality factor, that depends on the type of particle impacting the biological material.
And on the third bullet you have the quality factor for different kinds of radiation, for instance; for X-ray, gamma ray, electrons, and beta is a factor one.
Between two and 20 neutrons and alphas, which are helium nuclei, two protons, two neutrons, it's about 20 also.
And it can be more for iron ions.
The biological effect that impact a particle on a biological material depends on the type of particle, obviously.
An iron nucleus will have a much larger effect than a proton.
And another unit used in this respect is Sievert, Sv, is equal to 100 REM.
On this table, we have the physiological effect of radiation and typical doses.
We try, you see, on top, we try to always stay below 100 REM, or one Sievert, because this is vomiting effective threshold.
As long as you are in the area between 5 and 10, maybe 20 REMs, you are okay.
If you go toward 100, that's when you start to have problems, and obviously, if you have large values, above 500, then you have significant medical problems.
And you have, in the lower part of this table, the effect for different situations including a typical Shuttle mission, where you had normally, a total or less than one REM.
As long as you are on Low Earth Orbit, including the International Space Station, the radiation is not very, very high, because you are protected, on one hand, by the magnetosphere, and by the atmosphere that is remaining above you.
Remember that at 400 kilometers altitude, this is the altitude of the orbit of the International Space Station, you are in the ionosphere, you still have a portion of the ionosphere above you, which causes an absorption of the particles, whether they come from the Sun or from the Galaxy.
Here we have the radiation exposure for various activities.
The annual cosmic radiation at sea level, you see, is very low, is less than one milliSievert.
And the graph goes all the way to 500 days on the surface of Mars, where you have less that 1,000 milliSievert, or one Sievert, and remember, this is the equivalent of 100 REM.
So this is a limit that you never, never want to exceed.
So obviously, a long stay on the surface of Mars will cause, not an insignificant amount of radiation on the body, and measures have to be taken to protect the astronaut on Mars, during their trip toward the red planet, or when they are spending time over there, to be protected against radiation, typically on having habitation under the surface of Mars.
