So, hello. This is Muriel Richard-Noca.
I'm a space engineer at the EPFL
Space Engineering Center.
I've been doing space system engineering for a while, and also running the SwissCube as the project manager.
And I'm actually currently running the Clean Space program, also as a project manager.
The question about graveyard orbits arrives at the end of the mission.
When you're done with your satellite scientific experiments or commercial application, the question comes, what do you do with your satellite?
If your satellite was launched below 2,000 kilometer altitude, what we call the LEO orbit, the IADC, the Inter-Agency Space Debris
Coordination Committee, recommends that your satellite be brought back down into Earth's atmosphere within the 25 years after the mission completion.
Another option that you have when you're below this 2,000 kilometer altitude is to actually raise your satellite's orbit above the 2,000 kilometers, and at that point, your satellite could stay there above it for much longer than 25 years.
Say, for a very, very long time.
So that's what happen to the low Earth orbit satellites.
For the GEO satellites similar graveyard orbits exist and those graveyard orbits are about 300 kilometers above the typical 36,000 kilometer altitude orbits.
The purpose of the graveyard orbits are to put the old satellites that are at the end of life that do not function any more, to put them into a place that does not perturb the operational satellites.
The purpose of the Clean-mE program was to start development and understand better what are the challenges that are linked with the orbital debris, and also typically to look at what would be required in order to go ahead and go up there and remove the debris.
So what would be the challenges linked to this removal of debris, which are basically uncooperative.
So during about three - four years of this Clean-mE program we became smarter on the issues of active debris removal, and we made some developments with students on the robotics aspects, on space mechanisms to actually grab debris and started some developments on image recognition and image processing in order to provide a better understanding of the debris once the chaser is very close to it and on its rotations, on its state, and also on its texture.
Were there flakes?
Were there MLIs? [MLI=Multi Layer Insulation]
So pieces of the surface of the debris that would be out.
Are there solar arrays that could be damaged after many, many years in space?
So all of this required some specific image processing, which we started doing during this Clean-mE program.
Once we got to know enough, and as I said, became a bit more aware of the challenges of active debris removal, in 2012, we decided to actually make an implementation of what we had found, and we created this project called CleanSpace One.
And the objectives of CleanSpace One are basically very simple.
The first one is to increase the awareness in the world and with the students that orbital debris are something very important, that we cannot neglect it any more, such that the new students that will become engineers, so basically you, are aware that when you design a space mission, we should not forget about the end of life.
So that was the primary objective.
The secondary objective of CleanSpace One is to actually come up with miniaturized technologies in order to perform this uncooperative rendezvous.
And during that flight and during that mission, is to demonstrate and validate these new technologies.
The third aspect which was also very important to us was to actually go and do it, perform a debris removal on one of the two objects that belong to Switzerland, meaning SwissCube.
SwissCube was a target of choice because it actually belongs to Switzerland.
And so we don't enter into political issues because of that.
The mission scenario for CleanSpace One is quite simple.
We're going to be launching on an orbit which hopefully is not very far away from SwissCube orbit, and we'll start performing phasing maneuvers and orbit alignment maneuvers in order to find ourselves exactly in the same orbital plane of SwissCube.
At that point, when we are in the same orbital plane, we'll make maneuvers to come closer to it.
And the way we would do this is by knowing the position of SwissCube.
And we know this position of the SwissCube thanks to assets on the ground, radars and radar networks that already exist on the ground.
Those radars provide to us every day what we call two-line elements, which are the orbital elements that are calculated from their radar observations.
We have some idea of where SwissCube is.
So the first phase will be the phasing with the orbit and then the phasing with the SwissCube itself.
At that point, when we will be probably around 50 kilometers coming down to about 10 kilometers or so from SwissCube, we will have to start a phase which will be to determine its actual position.
This determination will be done by a phase of detection.
SwissCube is very small.
It's 10 by 10 by 10 cm.
So it's about that big.
And it has solar panels on each of these faces, which make it quite dark.
So the knowledge from the TLEs of the position of SwissCube [TLE=Two-line element set] are valid to about one kilometer to, in the cross track, about five kilometers.
So there will be this region where we have to come close but we are not sure exactly where SwissCube is.
So we're going to have to start sensors to do the detection to find SwissCube.
And currently, the sensors that we're planning on using are an infra-red camera and a radar.
Once SwissCube is detected, we will get closer and closer to it making sure at every step that we're not on the path of collision of SwissCube, of course.
And once we get close enough, we'll say 100 to 200 meters, we will start what we call
"an identification phase."
During that phase, we will take pictures of the object.
We'll send down the pictures to the ground of the object to reassure the world that we're picking the right debris.
Once that is done, we'll come even closer, and at about 20 meters or so from the object, we'll stop.
We'll stay in a station keeping, so very close approach and station-keeping phase and station, where we will take a lot of videos from SwissCube.
The intent here will be to reconstruct its motion, to check its integrity, and reconstruct its motion.
Once we have that, we will be able to determine where CleanSpace One needs to position itself with respect to SwissCube in order to maximize the chances of capturing it.
And of course, we will do all of these maneuvers and get to the capture phase.
And the capture phase in itself will be also a challenge because again, this object,
SwissCube, is non-cooperative.
It will be rotating.
There are two long antennas and the capture system will have to deal with these antennas moving around.
The actual capture system that we have chosen, the Pac-Man concept, allows to do this capture hopefully in a very safe way.
In fact, the challenges of the CleanSpace One mission are challenges that are related to active debris removal in general, meaning the approach and operations with an object which is not cooperative.
This object is not giving us a response, if we ask him how far we are.
It doesn't have any nicely placed features on it that we can track during the rotations.
So all of these technologies need to be further advanced, and represent the challenges of the capture.
The capture for CleanSpace One will be not as demanding as the capture for very large objects because SwissCube is a kilogram.
CleanSpace One will be bigger.
So in terms of ratios of inertias, it will be simpler than capturing a very big obect.
One of the implications of this work, which is not specific to us, and the whole space community is aware of it is since it's hard to rendezvous and capture an uncooperative object, the question is, can we create the new satellites with hardware that would help potentially being picked up by a remover satellite in the future.
So this is an activity that is going on currently at ESA, which is design-for-demise and design-for-removal, such that those techniques and processes will be applied for future satellites, such that they are, either when they come down in the atmosphere, they break up more easily, such you don't have as many possibilities of pieces of the satellite to be found on the ground.
Or to actually have hardware on satellites such that at the end of life, if they cannot for some reason come back down by themselves, then they would be easily picked up by remover satellites.
And maybe I can open up even more the realm of possibilities but one thing we could think of, and you as a student may want to start thinking of is instead of going up there to remove and take big satellites that have quite large masses, in fact, and bring them down to the Earth, wouldn't the next step be to actually put them and gather them in a large space station and use the materials and recycle these materials in this very large space station such that the material doesn't have to come down and then be launched again.
But it's what I would call the recycling of these debris and the creation of new satellites from the recycling that you found.
And those are topics that you may want to investigate and start thinking about and see how costly it would be to have such a recycling center in space.
A couple of years ago, we approached ESA with an activity which was actually very welcomed, which was to look at how we could reduce the risk of these very large missions to remove very large debris by in-orbit demonstrations.
And these in-orbit demonstrations could be done with CubeSats.
CubeSats are very small satellites.
We call those pico- or nano-satellites.
They go from one to about ten kilograms or so, eight, ten kilograms.
And the idea is that you could use those very small cost-effective satellites to make very specific demonstrations before flying those technologies into the very large mission.
And this way, you alleviate some of the risks that are taken by these very large missions.
So we proposed two scenarios to ESA using CubeSats.
One was to test rendezvous sensors, so these uncooperative rendezvous sensors, and the other one was to test the capture system called The Net.
That's where you launch a net and the net grabs an object or folds around an object.
And with ESA I was particularly interested in the in-orbit demonstration of the non-cooperative rendezvous sensors.
Also as a way to the risk and a way to test some of the algorithms that we'll need for the image processing.
So this mission we called CADRE, for CubeSat, ADR, Experiment. [ADR=Active Debris Removal]
And CADRE will have two CubeSats.
One, an eight-unit CubeSat, which was about eight kilograms, and then the other one, a four-unit CubeSat, which was about four kilograms.
And the idea was to actually have them launched attached, sent to space, do the commissioning phase, after the commissioning phase, do a release and detachment between the two, and have then the eight-unit CubeSat perform maneuvers around the debris and having the capability of the four-unit CubeSat to start making rotations, which we would know.
So that would basically validate some of the algorithms and all the GNC, the Guidance
Navigation Control, algorithms that would be required for doing all these maneuvers.
So this CADRE mission is something that we're trying to continue working on, and the spirit is there to miniaturize rendezvous sensors, make them potentially more cost-effective, and demonstrate them in space via CubeSats.
In fact, the most interesting debris to be picked up from space are very large debris.
Why's that? Because they typically have a very large mass, a very large cross-section area, and so the probability of a collision is the greatest and the probability of creating many, many more debris are the greatest.
There have been studies between NASA, ESA and papers published on this topic which show which are the 500 most wanted debris.
And they typically show old rocket bodies as debris of interest, and also very large and defunct satellites.
Currently, the European
Space Agency has a program dedicated to the removal of one of these large debris also as a demonstration and as a technology development.
So this initiative is called the CleanSpace Initiative and the mission associated with that initiative is called e.Deorbit.
And so we do refer you to the ESA website to get more in the details of it.
But here ESA is addressing the right question, which is, how do we actually go ahead and remove debris that are between two, four, eight tonne debris and that can be very large?
So again, 20 meters long.
Those debris will be most of the time spinning, hopefully not too fast.
So how do you do this capture?
How do you make sure that you reliably grab and bring back down to the Earth in a controlled manner such very large debris?
Those are great challenges.
Removal of large debris has its own set of technical challenges but in fact it also has its own set of political and ethical issues.
The first question that we can ask ourselves is, to whom do the debris belong?
Those debris may have been there for 20 years.
Who do they belong to?
And who is going to claim property of them?
So all issues related to their identification are things that are of concern.
Another part which is the legal frame that should be associated with orbital debris.
For instance, in the previous case we had Cosmos enter into collision with a currently functional and operational Iridium satellite.
You know, who's at fault?
Who should be responsible for it?
So all these legal frames into, if there's a collision, who is responsible for it?
But also the legal frame of how should nations that are sending satellites up there, how should they react and make sure within their country that laws are applied to make sure that future launches respect the regulations?
So there are UN regulations from the Committee on the Peaceful Use of Outer Space, the COPUOS, and there are lots of COPUOS currently activities in that domain, which is how to make sure that countries take responsibility.
Potentially, countries create their own internal laws that will increase the probability of all the satellites that we send to be brought back.
So these are legal issues.
There are other issues such as the funding.
Who is actually going to fund active debris removal?
We do need to remove about 500 debris in the next 10 to 20 years.
Who is going to fund this?
What are the mechanisms that we should put in place in order to do this fundraising?
And there are several options for it but none of them are yet very clear.
And finally, maybe a less obvious political aspect is that, in fact, if you create a chaser satellite, so a debris remover satellite, you actually have all the technologies in place to remove somebody else's satellite, so some other country's operational satellite.
And so there are military aspects to these technologies that are significant.
So these are political challenges and there are lots of meetings about this in the United Nations currently.
Most of the nations are very aware of the problem, which was not as much the case four, five, six years ago.
So we have been seeing a lot of increase in the awareness and political responsibility for this problem, which is great.
So I got fascinated by space when I was 12 years old when I saw my first astronomy pictures of galaxies and so on.
And so from that point on,
I knew that I wanted to work in a space related field.
And by making different choices of the schools I could go to and the options I could take,
I ended up working first in interplanetary missions and exploration of outer planets and inner planet, and now into the field of smaller satellites.
So it was a passion that drove me all along that was started at 12 years old, and it hasn't left me.
The studies that I did and the choice I made into which schools to go to were driven by the fact that I wanted to learn about space vehicles, launch vehicles, and then after that, spacecraft.
I did the basic engineering schools and at the Bachelor level, and then I got specialized and during my Masters into Aerospace I ended up also working.
At the same time
I could do my studies, which really helped with getting experience, hands-on experience on the space missions.
And then I found that in fact,
I was very interested, not in particular subsystems, sub elements of the satellite, but I was really interested into the interconnections that each subsystem had and how one subsystem could influence another.
And that's basically called Systems Engineering.
So this is how as I went along,
I got involved more and more into understanding the implications of the missions and the mission design into the system and then the trade-offs that you can have between the different subsystems when you actually build the satellite.
So the system engineer is like the chief of an orchestra where you need, in the end, when you have a complex system, you need to have somebody that can defend and see the interest of one person and make sure that that subsystem has all the information it needs to do its job and ensure the coherency of the design at the system level.
So it's very much a coordinator, also, job.
So I got very interested by that.
I think it's coming more from my nature than anything else.
