Hello and welcome to the course n°4 dedicated to hydrostatics. During this chapter, we will start by recalling the notion pressure within a fluid then we will see subsequently the law of hydrostatics or Pascal's law which is used to calculate the pressure distribution within a fluid. We will also see
Archimedes' principle used to calculate the total force of pressure, it is a result that is in general used to obtain much faster than Pascal's law the desired result but it is a result that doesn't apply to all cases. We will finish this chapter with a application example which is an extremely interesting example and extremely important as it concerns the computation of the pressure forces exerted by a volume of water on a vertical wall, for example what occurs for a dam. As usual, we start by a little warm up quiz. Let's consider an aquarium and we have at our disposal 
3 coins, these three coins are located at a depth h, the first one is place horizontally, the second coin is placed vertically, the third one is placed at 45°. The question is to know, for which of these coins the pressure force is maximum
? Second question,a little more difficult and that will require a little more reflection, let's consider a table, so a solid substrate, impermeable and that we put on this table an object, say a brick, and that we are looking to compute the force that we need to apply to put into motion this brick, a horizontal traction force.
In the first case, we are working in open air, in the second case, we will immerse the system in water. In one case where there is no pressure force apart from the atmospheric pressure force, in a second case there is a pressure force which is the pressure force of water, of a depth h, that will in addition be applied on the brick. The question is to know for which of these configurations the pressure force, the traction force, that must be applied on the brick is maximum. Before starting, we have to go back on some basic notions of what a pressure is.
In the case of a gas, we have seen in chapter
1 kinetic theory and we have explained that a gas is composed of molecules that are permanently agitating and these molecules will collide. If we place a wall, we will have collisions of molecules on this wall. These collisions will generate a flux of momentum which is responsible of a force that we name pressure.
Kinetic theory tells us that pressure is linked to the agitation velocity of molecules squared, it is linked to the molecules' mass and to molecules' number per unit volume thus to the number of densities.
We get pressure=1/3*number of densities*mass of molecules*agitation velocity^2. Let's look now at the macroscopic scale to what corresponds this force? Let's consider an infinitesimal surface area, so a small surface area S and this surface is orientated by a normal. The convention that I will use during this course, is that the normal n will always be orientated inwards, from where the facet is situated, outwards here where the fluid is. This fluid exerts a pressure force which is going in this direction here. The pressure force will be proportional to the surface area. The pressure force if I resume the course I just give you, the total force of pressure, will be the pressure multiplied by the surface area and as we here have a vector, I must orientate my force with respect to this vector, the force being in this direction here, the normal, by convention being in this direction here, I add a sign minus. We have here the definition of the total force of pressure, a pressure force is a pressure multiplied by a surface area and it is orientated by a normal. Let's recall the units, the pressure p is measured in pascal, I recall that the pascal doesn't take a capital letter. A force, like all forces is measured in newtons. A particular difficulty of the word pressure is that it will have different definitions according to the considered domain.
In mechanics or in physics, in general pressure means stress, i.e. force per units of area. In general, in fluid mechanics, we will have a definition a little more precise. For example, in the case of a gas or a compressible flow, we will define pressure thermodynamically from the internal energy, here U. The internal energy is linked to the variation of entropy and to the variation of volume. If I take this definition here of the internal energy, the pressure is thus the differential of the internal energy with respect to the volume at constant entropy. In the case where we are working with a medium that is incompressible, so, in this case the volume is constant, we see that this relation here is not defined.
In the case of an incompressible medium, the pressure is not defined thermodynamically, the pressure is thus undefined and to determine it we must solve the equations of motion. In this case here, the pressure is essentially used as an additional constraint in order to ensure that the fluid is incompressible.
A forth definition extremely common in mechanics of continuous media, is to define the pressure as being the average stress exerted on an object. If we take for example a floor, we will have, if we take for example a little cube which is at a certain depth, we will have on each side of this cube stress values that are different, if I do the average of the normal stresses that are exerted on this cube, I will thus define a pressure.
We see that the word pressure will have meanings, exceptions relatively different depending on the context and so we will have to bring particular care to this context in order to know exactly what to do. Of course, as it is an introductory course we will situate ourselves often in the case where we will be dealing with an incompressible medium, and, in this case, the pressure will be a flow variable that must be determined¨ by solving the equations of motion.
First of all let's go back to the case of a compressible fluid, for example a gas such as air. We will introduce two measures of the compressibility of gas.
The first one is called isothermal compressibility.
The second one is called adiabatic compressibility or sometimes isentropic. In both cases we define a relative variation of volume with respect to the pressure, when we speak of isothermal compressibility we are working at constant temperature, when we speak of adiabatic compressibility, we are working at constant entropy. In the case of an ideal gas, by using the ideal gas law, we can calculate quite simply these coefficients βT and βS, we obtain the following relation. In the case of a compressible medium, we can show that for example a sound wave corresponds to a pressure variation, to a local variation of volume or density of the fluid.
We can compute or we can define the speed of sound or the velocity of sound, here the square of the velocity, as being the variation of pressure as a function of the density at constant entropy. By using the definition of βS given previously, this definition of the velocity can also be written as: c^2 = 1/ density of the fluid * adiabatic compressibility. If we look for a couple of numerical values of this compressibility, we will find that it is weak for a gas as we have seen that for an ideal gas we will be roughly speaking proportional to 1/P, so if we take the atmospheric pressure: 10^5 pascals, we will find ourselves with an adiabatic coefficient equal to 10^-5 1/pascals. In the case of a liquid such as water, we will have values that will be much weaker, which are generally of the order of 10^-10,
10^-11, for example, in the case of water, we will have a compressibility adiabatic coefficient equal to 4,58*10^-10 1/pascals.
In practice, we will be able to assume that water
(the liquid) is a medium so little compressible that it is incompressible, so that its density does not vary. It is something simple to understand. In the case of a gas, in a certain number of cases, we can do an assumption quite similar, and to justify it we will use a non-dimensional number called the Mach number and that is the ratio between the velocity of motion of the fluid, that I call u, or the velocity of motion of an object in a gas at rest u over the velocity of sound propagation in this gas. When we are working at very low Mach number, the Mach number is very small compared to 1, the displacement of the object will not cause significant variations of the density of the gas. In this case here, we will say that the flow is isochore, from the Greek iso: the same and chore: the volume. The flow will keep the same volume, the medium, even though it is compressible will behave as an incompressible medium.
When however the Mach number tends to 1, it will be greater than 1, which is the case for example of supersonic airplanes.
In this case here we will have the motion of the object, the motion of air that will be done with significant variations of the density of the gas and in that case, we will not be able to neglect the compressibility of the gas. We have seen during this first module some reminders on the notion of pressure and we have also defined the notion of compressible media and isochoric flows.
During the second module we will introduce the notion of pascal which is the cornerstone of fluid mechanics.
