The era of absolute urbanization is ending, and, from now on, what can be found, on the horizon of urban agency, is relative urbanization.
The city is not a new phenomenon in human history.
Cities appear roughly at the same time as farming, writing, money, and the state.
The invention of the city can be seen at the outcome of the Neolithic Revolution due to the existence of food surpluses, allowing for new and totally artificial settlements.
However, as Jane Jacobs and Henri Lefebvre argued, the emergence of cities as political, religious, commercial, or cultural areas, can also be understood as the cause of this revolution.
In brief, a city is an amazing spatial machine.
All throughout the process of urbanization, the very idea of a city has triggered some negative attitudes.
There has been a long tradition of rejecting urbanity.
The history of the city entered our minds through a spell.
The curse on the city, and on density, and, indeed, on globalization too, had already been announced in the Old Testament.
The God of the Jews and Christians was the first enemy of density.
Then, the curse upon density was maintained, and given fresh impetus, by an important European puritanical-communal tradition.
This tradition was represented at the highest philosophical and literary levels, by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who wrote:
This tradition continued in Europe, and increased under the influence of agrarian states, which perceived emerging large cities as dangerous political rivals.
This was particularly the case for France, where the alliance between the central state and rural notables kept Paris and other major urban areas, in a state of subjugation.
In many European countries, the imagined community underpinning national identity was nothing more than the myth of a self-sufficient, nature-friendly, prolific, and harmonious countryside, unfortunately, undermined and threatened by messy, artificial, and sterile cities.
This myth migrated to America, conveyed by people who, from the day they landed, began to build an overwhelmingly urban environment, while remaining proud and ardent militants of their puritanical cause.
This probably explains a paradox.
The North American version of the anti-urban narrative is embodied, if not by a city, then, at least, by a town-like landscape, that of Main Street America, with its parochial single-street community, and its farming hinterland, but not exactly with the plow, plowing, and plowman, of European mythologies. ‘Parochial’ was the word used by Lyn Lofland to designate the kind of fake public space where anonymity is impossible.
We will explore this idea more in-depth during this session.
In Walt Disney's images, the discourse may seem to have been secularized.
However, when one reads the following statement, in a Dearborn published article by Henry Ford, stigmatizing the pestiferous growth of the city, one discovers an unquestionable continuity with the Bible's inspiration and style.
On the academic side, the libertarian utopia, epitomized by Melvyn Webber, in the 50s, or the cybermythology proposed by the early William Mitchell, joyfully celebrating the end of the city, completes the picture.
Why so much hatred?
An attractive hypothesis is that the city is the hyper-realistic expression of human agency.
In a city, everything is artificial, including, of course, nature.
Hatred for urbanity is hatred for society, and, more specifically, for the inevitable exposure to otherness which a city harbors in each of its dimensions.
Lyn Lofland has called the city a ‘world of strangers’.
A city is the kind of place where people are forced to entertain limited relationships with unknown others who, nevertheless, belong to the same society as ours.
Cities mark the end of the communal dream - or nightmare -, a world where any people tossed away are known and watched, as we are known and watched by them.
In any city, even in communally-organized societies, the perspective of a society of individuals, with more society and individuality, is both possible and conceivable.
Tell me what you think about cities, and I will tell you what is your social attitude and, if you are a scholar, what is your social theory.
