In the next session, it will be shown that urbanity is not only a technical feature that characterizes a rapidly urbanizing World.
It is also a pivotal issue which is at stake, beyond urban planning, in almost every societal - that is political - debate.
What exactly is a city?
Answering this question never seems to have been easy.
It's become even less so now.
The urban is a spatial arrangement where urbanity makes sense.
Urbanity is that which gives space its urban character.
It can be summarized as a combination of density and diversity.
It is what has sometimes been called ‘urbanism’ in North American urban studies, such as the famous article from 1938, ‘Urbanism as a Way of Life’.
More recently, the term ‘urbanism’ has been influenced by its French ‘urbanisme’ and Spanish ‘urbanismo’ meanings, and it tends to replace the term ‘urban planning’.
Finally, ‘city’ means a particular urban configuration.
A city is an urban space par excellence, a space with a relatively higher level of urbanity in a given context, but there are other kinds of urban spaces as well.
Why do cities exist?
If distance is a problem for social interactions, how can it be solved?
Since the beginning of the Neolithic Age, there have essentially been three ways of managing distance.
Coopetition is a neologism summarizing a combination of competition and cooperation.
This table shows that in the ‘coopetitive’ interactions between the three major ways of managing distance - co-presence, mobility, and tele-communication - co-presence, and therefore, urbanity, possesses and preserves certain comparative advantages.
However, there is also a cooperative component.
In a city, there is a synchronization of people, and in order to approach the idea of urban co-presence, we must employ other techniques allowing for distance management.
The denser, more diverse and more messy the city is, the more people move about within it, the more objects are transported around within it, and the more people telephone, email and text message each other.
The more people chat, the more people Skype.
Co-presence is nourished by its rivals, mobility and tele-communication.
Urbanization has lent the fullness of its strength to this paradox: it's only now that billions of urban dwellers exist, that there are also billions of tourists and billions of internet users.
Urban civilization is also made up of the lacunae of its utopias.
