The aim of this module is to go a little deeper into the strategy operationalisation.
Last week focused on how entrepreneurial discovery can be organised in terms of priorities or strategic areas.
This module will now focus on the second stage of entrepreneurial discovery which lies within each priority area.
As we have already said, the entrepreneurial discovery does not stop when priorities are established, but it concerns the exploration of every area on the basis of coordinated research and innovation investments as well as the development of specific infrastructures in order to facilitate this coordination.
All of this without losing sight of the ultimate aim that from each priority area a transformative activity is constituted which will take off and reach a certain critical mass to lead to a structural change.
What are the precise objectives of this second stage of entrepreneurial discovery?
In each priority area it is a case of learning about the effective potentials and opportunities with the aim to develop a new transformative activity.
It is also about improving coordination amongst resources and involved parties with the aim to produce the first effects of critical mass agglomeration, of synergy.
It is also about building the additional capabilities and fill a few gaps, overcoming a few weaknesses in the knowledge base, in the service infrastructure, or in the coordination tools.
Finally the connection between the considered priority area and the extra-regional resources and skills must be ensured by supporting new links and partnerships with other regions.
As we have already seen an important condition for these coordination and agglomeration efforts to be productive is that the chosen priority areas are not too large.
In an overly large area, the projects and other initiatives will inevitably be scattered, with little hope of synergy and agglomeration.
In a more narrow area, for example the area of flexible technology in the shoe industry, which we have seen in the Northern Portugal case, we can expect a better return of the strategy in terms of the scale of agglomeration and spill overs, which is a very important goal.
Let's continue with an example: the Basque
Country.
This example will be explored further in the fifth week, as this region will be the object of an entire case study.
In the smart specialisation strategy of the
Basque
Country, there are seven priority areas which have been selected, including advanced production and industry 4.0 technologies.
Here we are not interested in the reasons for choosing these priority areas, but in what happens once the choice has been made.
The first thing to remember is on an organisational level, the creation of a steering committee which includes public and private actors.
With this committee, a space for decision and initiative is created to identify key problems to be resolved, to choose relevant plans.
We will then examine this in the case of the
Basque
Country and this priority strategy.
We will also identify current projects, relevant entrepreneurial activities for the considered strategic area.
This committee should also instill a dynamic, an effervescence so that all of those involved in the area come together and propose initiatives.
In order for the effects of synergy and agglomeration to be generated and a truly new activity to take off, to form a certain critical mass.
Here is a list of the identified projects.
This list is quite heterogeneous.
It includes projects of research, platform and infrastructure development, training and education initiatives, liaison projects with other priorities of the energetic-environmental strategy, as well as initiatives looking towards the international market.
If we do a little bit of sorting, we can identify the following mechanisms which can be implemented in any smart specialisation strategy.
Firstly, any action or initiative needs leaders.
These potential leaders must be discovered and supported so that they take control of these different initiatives.
It can be a case of, as in the Basque Country, a university who leads training initiatives, a professional association, or the management structure of a cluster, or even a specific company, or a motivated entrepreneur.
The second mechanism, the call for projects for the development or the demonstration of such and such critical technological feature, is a well-known mechanism.
Mobilising public financing, criteria for this have already been looked at in the second week.
This public financing is particularly necessary when it involves undertaking a collective action which involves several different parties with the aim to integrate and combine separate knowledge.
We cannot lose sight of the fact that we are in an entrepreneurial discovery logic, the second stage, therefore that the companies which are helped must accept the diffusion of information relating to these projects.
The third mechanism is the development of research and innovation infrastructures to facilitate the provision of necessary complementary capabilities for innovation, as well as coordination between projects.
We have already highlighted that a rich innovation ecosystem should provide these capabilities that the majority of businesses cannot produce internally, specialised services, basic research, test systems, etc.
The fashionable term here is "platform".
We can think of platforms centered on a general objective technology, such as information technologies, which can serve several priority areas.
We can also think of platforms to produce synergies between different priorities, rearranging platforms.
This is the case in the Basque Country in terms of advanced energy production and advanced environment production areas.
The article by Finnish colleagues from the
Universities of Aalto and Lahti which is referenced in this module shows that in Finland there is a tool systematically deployed within the smart specialisation strategies in the majority of Finnish regions.
These coordination initiatives go beyond the region to facilitate the links between regional projects and some external resources.
This is the case in the Basque Country with multiple international partnerships who have found a new purpose within the smart specialisation strategy.
The fourth mechanism is a fundamental action which concerns the development of new skills and the necessary specialised knowledge for the growth of the selected area.
These actions concern training and education.
This is the case in the Basque Country.
Neglecting these specific investments is an error that we mentioned during the last module in the second week.
Of course, part of the solution to this adjustment problem in terms of human capital comes from the exterior, the call for engineers, for scientists from outside the region.
But when a priority strategic area has been identified, the specialised human capital that corresponds to this area becomes a really fundamental asset for the region.
It therefore makes sense that the region gets involved in activities in favour of its endogenous development.
Let's move on to the fifth mechanism: it is definitely also important to mobilise the cluster(s) which are concerned in each priority area in order for it to lead coherent actions relating to the smart specialisation strategy, so that their objectives are aligned with these priorities.
A cluster can be a useful tool in the service of a strategy's objectives, but it has to be mobilised.
We could say the same thing for regional localisation or attraction policies which should be harmonised, in line with the smart specialisation strategy.
Finally, the universities in each region can represent a formidable tool in the service of the smart specialisation strategy, in terms of research of course, but also of coordination, infrastructure, and also obviously training.
Therefore it is necessary that universities get involved in priority areas and become main parties within each of these areas.
Here is the list of mechanisms to use in order to put initiatives and actions in place that can be financed within a priority area in the smart specialisation strategy.
That is how we go from, as in the Basque Country case, identifying a priority area to the more concrete stage of entrepreneurial discovery with a large number of projects, activities, infrastructures development.
In the end, we aim for the development of new activities characterized by a certain critical mass and effects of agglomeration and spill overs.
We have just tackled the operationalisation of a critical stage in the process of entrepreneurial discovery.
The stage that allows us to learn specifically about the opportunities and the potentialities within a specific strategic area.
The example of the advanced production technologies area in the Basque
Country's strategy is interesting.
But it is only one example.
The list of mechanisms that we have commented on is only one list.
Every priority strategic area is different, and we must therefore think about mechanisms adapted to these specificities.
Depending on the existing structures: are there clusters?
Are there big companies?
A technological university?
Depending on the potential leaders, the entrepreneurial dynamism already present, potential gaps and weaknesses, we must focus on one mechanism rather than another.
What will be pertinent in one area will not necessarily be in another.
It is simply important not to lose sight of the ultimate aim, which is to really progress within each area towards the creation and growth of a new transformative activity.
Thank you.
