Welcome everybody.
Let's have a look at monitoring and evaluation.
Although it is not really part of a strategy design process and often happens only after the strategy has to be defined it is a crucial element for a successful strategy.
But often it's not really taken seriously and that might be due for two reasons.
The first I already mentioned because it only starts after the strategy is defined, in some cases even after the program has been finished, but that, of course, is an error.
You should have evaluation and monitoring right from the beginning of the definition of strategy.
I'll come back to that in a minute.
Secondly, it is a very challenging task and sometimes, it seems to be too challenging to really follow it up.
But as Roderic puts it very nicely, it is not because the application of the most rigid and academically recognised methods is not possible that all attempts of assessment should be abandoned.
Clearly here it's stated that we should assess even if we do it not optimally.
One of the big challenges the identification of the effects of a program or put in other words, the causality of these effects, and again
Roderick gives a hint to us how we can solve at least partly this problem.
We must at least establish ex ante clear benchmark and criteria for success and for failure at the various levels of the strategy.
The definition of what is a success and what is a failure might help afterwards to identify, not the causality itself but the effect of the program.
Let's have a quick view on a couple of fundamentals on monitoring and evaluation.
What is the purpose of evaluation?
Actually we talked in the last video a lot about flexibility, and during the complete online course, we talk a lot about entrepreneurial discovery and the entrepreneurial process.
But without information both the flexibility and entrepreneurial process won't work.
The monitoring and evaluation is the source of the information which we need to really make these processes work.
A second fundamental issue is that it is part of building this strategy or designing the strategy to keep monitoring and evaluation in mind.
That's what also
Roderick already told us.
You have to define clearly the objectives of your strategy: what do you want to achieve?
What are the goals?
They must be explicitly clear.
And also already through the strategy designing process you should define the metrics, how you will measure success or failure in your objectives.
That helps you to define more clearly your strategy when you have to think about what the metrics are.
So you have to define the objective of the program.
You have to define the metrics how to measure the success or failure of these objectives, and last not least you have to define the data generation process: where do you get the data from for the metrics so that you have the necessary data at the end available when you do evaluation and monitoring?
Evaluation and monitoring have to be flexible, that's the third fundamental issue. The strategy itself is a very flexible tool, it can have a lot of different ways how the strategy might work, you a lot of different areas where it may apply to and therefore also the evaluation has to follow up that differences.
It's not a one size fits all once more, but you have to adapt the evaluation process to your strategy.
There is a question often raised if the evaluation is to be quantitative or only qualitative.
But actually it's qualitative and quantitative which you should follow.
Some things can only be defined qualitatively or measured or observed qualitatively, but you also need quantitative measures wherever possible because it provides more information.
We already defined four steps of monitoring or evaluation when we defined the process to build a strategy, so that it's clear right from the beginning on which points you have to take measurements and controls.
Let's go through these four in a bit more detail and look for examples for each of them.
The first stage in the monitoring process is what we call the Strategic profile of the region evaluation, here we control particularly if the priority areas chosen are the right ones.
Of course they are the result from an extended analysis of the base of evidence and entrepreneurial resources but still there might be changes necessary.
It might be necessary that changes are due to a changing world, that's always changing and it might be you need new other priority areas.
It might also be due to the results of the monitoring evaluation of the other stages which should then feed back into the priority areas and at some point might tell that one or another priority area should not be followed anymore.
There's also a nice little test to the priority areas which we like to apply in this stage.
We call it the x test and the ones of you who speak
German would know it from the saying of x beliebig why we call it the x test.
It takes your strategy, your priority areas and the reasoning behind them and then replaces the name of your region with another region.
And if you do that and the strategy still sounds sensible then it's probably not define a precise enough for your region but follows too much the general trends.
In that part, this kind of evaluation, of course, starts immediately after defining the priority areas but is a continuous process.
The strategy actually is never finished it's a rolling process or rolling a strategy and priority areas might change at any point in time.
This notion of the rolling strategy shows that this is not really an evaluation or an ex post evaluation but is a kind of a rethinking of the strategy and choices you did.
Therefore also the notion of causality problems which we discussed above is no issue here, there is no causality in that case but we just evaluate if we had the right process to come to the same results of the strategic process, not of the outcome of strategy implementation.
The results of the strategy implementation, a part of the second stage of the evaluation and monitoring process, here we look at the classical projects and activities evaluation.
This is something which is very usual and there is a big literature, we don't need to discuss that a lot, there are typically questions asked like finances and accounting all right in the programs, what kind of activities are there, monitored activities achieved through the programs, like for example meetings or contacts made, webpages or information, tools produced, things like that, and also the output of the program, so counting how much contacts you reached, how many meetings were held, how many people you reached, or with patents or publications, they can give you information on the outcomes.
But, of course, this is not the objective of the smart specialisation strategy, it's not meetings or webpages or contacts which you should count, we have other objectives, but they provide you good information on if the projects and activities work right.
The method here is often self-reporting either by the management of the program or by the participants of the programs themselves, and the measurements can be defined fairly easily because this information is readily available, and causality is not a big issue because there's a direct link to between program and outcome so causality is rather clear here.
But that's not the end, also many evaluations of programs and of strategies stop at that point, this is not specialisation strategy, we have more to monitor.
The third stage of the monitoring process is what we call the critical mass evaluation.
As we recall by now very well I'm sure, is that critical mass is an aim of the smart specialisation strategy, to achieve structured change in the economy in the end, and we should try to measure these steps to our overall objective, the critical mass generation.
Evaluating the critical mass is much more difficult than evaluation for example of the project side.
While in a project, we have a relatively clear linkage of causality between outcome and project imputs, it's much weaker on the critical mass side.
But if you think about critical mass as building up capacity, we can also find indicators which help us measure that. Although the causal link might be weaker, we still see if the capacity changes in the region or not.
Now how can we measure capacity?
That is not really straightforward and it is not a well-established way to measure it, but there are a couple of ideas around how to do that.
But again depending on your strategy and the focus of your strategy, there might be different ways you measure the capacity change in your region to be achieved by the strategy but maybe the examples I have gives you an idea how that could be done.
One way of capacity is building networks, the closer you've worked together that is well established higher your output is particularly in a knowledge economy or a knowledge generation process. You have actually increasing economies of scale here.
And there are a couple of tools to measure network and network development.
One example is you take social platforms, business platforms like LinkedIn or Xing in Germany or other platforms available around the world and measure how many people are taking part of that program in particular, maybe of the profession or in the jobs which are interesting for you as much smart specialisation strategy is this increasing how active are they on the platforms and measurements like that, that could give you an indication if the network capacity increases.
The generation of knowledge, the reliability of knowledge in the region is also a fundamental issue of capacities.
And again we look here at indicators or we can look here at indicators depending on your precise strategy which are already well-known.
Patents can be such an indicator, papers in publications can be another one but trademarks, new products can be further indicators.
All the start-up companies are a kind of a knowledge generation and can be counted in here as well.
A further issue increasing the capacity in the region might be through building trust and then in the next step forming cooperations.
And cooperations can be quite well measured, there are many different ways to really look at them.
Again it could be patents for example, co-patents between two companies or co-patents between an academic institution and the company might be measurement for cooperations or increased corporation.
Or you might look at the subsidised project which is often by definition involves more than one player and if they increase in size or in number.
And there are many other possibilities for examples of the social networks can also show up of cooperations.
You can also follow people who do social networks when they work for different cooperations that could be another issue increasing the capacity in the region.
Now as these examples already show, this is not the measurement of the capacity building or the measurement of the critical in mass, this is not a single number away you can put everything in.
You need to understand the system and then we find the measures which reflect that system.
Therefore it is not only an evaluation ex ante but the information you gather here are also an important steering instrument for the implementation of your strategy and actually even to go back to the strategy itself that was the first part of the evaluation process there, strategic profile of the region.
To do so, of course, you need indicators which are timely available, not with a long delay only but the ones we discussed in the last few minutes are usually quite quickly available and so you can use them for monitoring and evaluation just as well as for steering your strategy.
With the fourth stage of the monitoring process we are actually getting close to the core objective of this smart specialisation strategy.
We want to achieve structural change in the economy, we want to improve the development of the economy.
Now the objectives here are rather clear and they clearly relate to measurement as well.
For example, you want to generate jobs or maybe not just jobs but usually sustainable jobs, jobs with a future and well-paid jobs. At all this can be measured easily.
Our objective is to rise a new industry or to re rise an old one.
Again this can be easily measured.
You might also aim the shifting focus of an industry for more domestic to an international export player or from a lower part, technology part of the industry to the high-tech part.
Again measurement is straightforward here.
Ultimately we want to increase the competitiveness, the international competitiveness of the industries in the regions of the program and again here are measurements available.
We discussed all these kinds of measures when we discussed the base of evidence analysis and the same information can be used again here.
But there is, of course, a big but to it otherwise it would be too easy, the causality between the program and the objectives or the measurements are very weak if there are hardly at all, it can't prove the causality.
Still we should monitor and evaluate that probably best done in a benchmarking setting that we at least allow for common trends to be filtered and for overall cyclical effects to be filtered and not put through the project that allows us to elevate the overall structural change.
Now we went through the four stages of the measurement process individually and we saw also they differ a lot for each stage it is possible to find the right measurement and to do monitoring and evaluation.
Of course in some cases we need to be creative to find the right measurements and the measurement has been adapted to the individual strategy but it is possible to monitor and evaluate all of this.
But there's a note of cautionary necessary.
We get what we measure.
When we define a measurement we give incentive to program implementers to program managers and to people participating in the program.
If they are evaluated for their success or failure that will be done by the measurement not by the objectives.
And therefore they tend to maximise the measurements and at least possibly ignore the objectives.
That means you need to define the measurement very carefully so that measurement and objectives are showed going in the same direction and we have to define the measurement completely, meaning that all objective are part of the measurement.
For example, if the focus the measurement on only projects and activities evaluation like output of a program or activity in the program or the correct accounting then the program managers or the strategy managers will focus on that as well and not look that much at the long-term objective of the program which is actually what is the objective of smart specialisation is not successful programs but it's critical mass and then structural change. And it might be missed by defining too much evaluation in the short term and not enough in the long term.
That has to be carefully defined but also completely defined the measurement.
It's very important to take the four steps of the evaluation process seriously and not stop after the second or the third one.
Summing up on the monitoring and evaluation process, we looked at the four stages of the process individually and discussed them. Also they differ from each other quite a bit, in the methods, in the metrics and in their causality towards the program still all of them are essential for the smart specialisation strategy.
One thing we haven't discussed yet is the timing between them because that also varies between the different stages of the monitoring.
The first step to a strategic profile actually takes place already throughout the definition of the strategy and then continues through the whole period the strategy is evaluated.
So it's probably appropriate to say after one year you have the first answer first evaluation result on the strategic profile.
For the project stage of the evaluation it takes some more time, project has to be defined, implemented and started before you can start evaluating.
So after two to three years you probably have first result.
But, of course, it doesn't mean that you have to wait two to three years to start to monitoring and evaluation process.
Quite the opposite you should plan right from the beginning and start right away with the strategy to collect the necessary data.
But the first results, the first judgement can probably made of two or three years.
Even more time it takes naturally to evaluate to new activities and the generation of critical mass or how we put it the capacity building in the region.
As many different programs and activities a project should contribute to that it's probably fair to say after three to five years you might be able to see first results not much earlier.
And then the overall objective, the structural change even takes more time five to eight years, is probably appropriate here to really have first judgement on the overall success of the strategy.
Now monitoring and evaluation is crucial and also it only takes place later on and you only get on those, much later after starting the strategy you should think right from the beginning and you define your strategy.
For one reason that the measurements fit the objectives of the strategy perfectly for the other reasons that you gather the necessary data to really do the evaluations and define the data generation process right from the beginning.
Therefore evaluation and monitoring is one topic when defining a strategy also it's done on later.
Thank you very much and see you again.
