Hello. Welcome.
I'm Kevin Morgan from Cardiff University.
I'm Professor of
Governance and Development of the University, as well as the Dean of Engagement.
That means
I'm responsible for the
University's relationships with government, business, and civil society, organizations
I say that because
I'm trying to do in my everyday life what I'm talking about this morning.
So, ah, this is what
I want to talk about:
I want to talk about the Smart State
By which I mean
Good government or enlightened public policy.
And I wanted to do three things:
I want to look at debates on the state.
I want to look at key aspects of the smart state.
And I'll conclude by looking at some good examples from regions around Europe. smart specialisation policy is the most ambitious regional innovation policy ever introduced anywhere in the world.
But it makes two major presumptions which are not often explicitly made.
The first presumption is a political presumption.
And it presumes that regional elites really want to innovate.
But in actual fact they may simply want to retain control or simply maintain the status quo.
The second major presumption:
Is that the state and its public sector agencies are really competent to meet the challenge of smart specialisation.
Both these presumptions really need to be scrutinized very, very carefully.
My first theme is about debates on the state
And there's a certain state discourse about the role of the state in economic development.
It is almost impossible
- as Will Hutton shows here -
"It's almost impossible to think straight about the state without assuming that we have to shrink it, fragment it, or privatise it."
And this discourse is especially prominent in certain countries, like the United States of America or the United Kingdom, for example.
But it is true in varying degrees in many countries around the world.
And we need to challenge this state discourse.
Where does it come from?
I think the state discourse was just critical of the state.
It takes a very negative view of the state, really stems from the dominance of neoliberal ideology.
And while some of that ideology is very crude, for example, less State equals more market, for example.
That's very crude.
I think there is a very serious philosophy behind some of the neoliberal criticisms of the state.
And these...theories these critical theories stem originally from the work of Friedrich Hayek, who was a very, very serious
...and sophisticated...
...economic theorist.
And these insights from Hayek's that are used today by neo-liberal critics of the State, boiled down to two things.
First of all, they maintain that industrial policy should largely by avoided.
Why?
Because industrial policy...
...encourages firms to engage in rent seeking.
Or to seek special privileges from the state.
For example, state subsidies.
When they should be seeking to innovate.
Rather than to engage in rent seeking.
And therefore industrial policy should be avoided and picking winners should be avoided
Because the state creates perverse incentives for firms.
And the second...criticism that stems from Hayek's work,
I think, is about the informational capacity of the state.
The State can never be a surrogate, can never be a substitute, in other words for the decentralized information processing capacity of markets.
And therefore, these two assumptions together have boiled down to a neoliberal critique of the State which often suggests to policy makers that the public sector is bad.
While the private sector is good.
And we need to get beyond that simple binary antithesis.
In recent years, there has been a number
...of interesting...critiques of this neoliberal criticism.
A very interesting one comes from Mariana Mazzucato who wrote a very stimulating book called "The Entrepreneurial State".
In this book,
Mazzucato tries to change the way we think and talk about the state.
To try to paint the state in a positive light rather than a purely negative light.
She shows that the state can be innovative and risk-taking.
And to prove her argument she takes the example of Apple's technologies.
And she shows how all these technologies in the iPhone, for example, were all funded by the state through federal grants.
This is a marvelously stimulating book
But if I had a criticism to make of it it would be that she underplays the creativity of Apple
Because any firm could have developed those projects, but only Apple did.
And it overplays the creativity of the public sector.
She looks at very unique public sector agencies, like Darper, from the United States, for example, which I think is the exception, rather than the norm of public sector agencies.
What about other positions?
The most important critique of the neoliberal position, in my view, is what I would call the experimentalist approach of people like Danny Rodrick and Charles Sabel.
What Rodrick does, for example, he accepts the Hayek critique that the State lacks information.
But he turns this criticism on its head by saying the private sector also lacks information. the private sector also lacks information.
Both the public sector and the private sector lack information when they are engaging in experimenting for new technologies, for innovation.
And the implication of this insight is that both firms and states need to collaborate, to learn together, in a trial and error process of experimentation.
The main aim of this process of trial and error is to try to secure, or illicit information.
In other words, to find joint solutions to common problems and to evaluate outcomes almost in real time.
And this process is sometimes called diagnostic monitoring.
This is the smart state thesis which is is adopted in this MOOC.
And it is presumed in the smart specialisation strategy of the European Commission.
The smart state presumption is based on, and is an example of, what is sometimes called is based on, and is an example of, what is sometimes called experimentalist governance.
Experimentalist governance simply means a recursive process of provisional goal-setting and revision based on learning from the comparison of alternative approaches.
This the definition that is given to experimental governance by Charles Sabel and Johnathan Zeitlin.
For example, at bottom, it involves joint goal-setting between central and local units where local units have the discretion to meet the goals of a particular project in question.
And these projects, are subject to a continuous process of diagnostic monitoring.
But this is the important point.
The primary aim of diagnostic monitoring is to build problem-solving capacity, not to police compliance.
In other words, diagnostic monitoring is a tool for learning not control.
While experimentalist governance is a very compelling principle, it is very challenging to do in practice for a number of reasons.
For example, it presumes strong feedback.
In all evolutionary theories, feedback plays an absolutely crucial role.
But in practice, feedback is stymied by many things.
Good feedback is stymied by fear, by power, by hierarchy
I often say to my master students,
Good feedback is like gold dust, and just as difficult to get.
So we should never assume that feedback is readily available.
Another barrier, is the public sector culture around failure.
Failure is not tolerated in the public sector.
The public sector is invited to be more experimental, more agile, less risk-averse.
It is invited to be all these things so long as the public sector does not make a mistake.
That would be comical if was not also tragic.
You cannot experiment without making mistakes.
Another barrier to experimental governance is the role of learning in the public sector.
Learning is vital, of course, but many public sector agencies never give enough time or space to monitoring, to evaluation, and to revision.
All of which are vital to experimentalist governance.
Monitoring and evaluation, for example, have a low status in the public sector.
We say they have a Cinderella status about them.
And yet they are the keys to feedback and learning.
Especially when innovation is assuming more and more importance in European regional policy.
For example, when European regional policy began in the late 1980s innovation-related investment accounted for about 4% of the entire programming period.
Just 4%.
If we think of the current programming period
2014 to 2020, innovation-related investment measures account for 45% of the entire program.
In other words, innovation is assuming more and more importance, and innovation means novelty.
And the public sector finds it very difficult to cope with novelty; because it likes to have standardized procedures to audit.
So what I have done in this opening theme discussing debates about the State, is to try to emphasize both the opportunities as well as the limits of these debates.
And now I want to turn to my second theme which is about looking at key aspects of what I've called the smart state.
The smart state, as I said earlier, is simply a term that I use to convey good government or enlightened public policies.
And it has a number of key aspects.
Quality of regional government is one.
Looking at public procurement capacity is another.
The entrepreneurial discovery process is the heart of smart specialisation
And that assumes responsive and committed regional political elites
Let us look at some of these key aspects in more detail.
Quality of government is a very important condition of a smart specialisation strategy.
And yet the work that has been done by the European Commission to look at how regional government differ throughout Europe, how regional government differ throughout Europe, in terms of the quality of government, shows enormous variation in the capacity of regional governments to deliver good services.
On this map, for example, where we can see the darker the colour the less good the regional government.
The lighter the colour the better the quality of government.
We can see that poor governance is often associated with poor innovation and poor economic growth.
Poor governance also makes for poor and unresponsive public services.
Thirdly, we can say that poor governance is also both cause and consequence of fraud and corruption.
And putting all these things together we can say as the European Commission itself also says,
That poor governments compromises the impact of cohesion policies because it reduces the absorptive capacity, that is to say, the capacity of a regional government to absorb and deploy regional policy funds effectively.
Let's look that in more detail.
This is the absorptive capacity figure that is used by the European Commission.
We can see along the horizontal axis at the bottom, the absorption rate of cohesion policy for the funding program
2007 to 2013.
Along the vertical axis is the World Bank's
Government effectiveness index. is the World Bank's
Government effectiveness index.
And putting these things together there is a rough correlation
I would say, between these two indicators.
For example, if we think of Romania
Romania has very weak governance capacity.
And it also has very weak absorptive capacity for cohesion policy.
This relationship, of course, doesn't always work; because on the other side we have Portugal.
Portugal, which does not have great
Governance Capacity but it does have a large absorptive capacity which does not have great
Governance Capacity but it does have a large absorptive capacity for cohesion policy.
And that's partly because the way in which small countries often are able to design policies in a better way than large countries.
If we move on to the next section.
Public procurement is a very important index of the capacity of regional government to design and deploy regional policy effectively.
Public procurement has huge potential to procure new policies, to deliver new services, for example, but it is stymied in practice.
Why?
Because of a combination of poor skills and low political commitment.
Public procurement, I would say, is the sleeping giant of European regional policy.
It's sleeping because regional governments simply do not have the skill sets to design and deploy their power of purchase in an effective way.
And this is a major problem for regional policy; because public procurement, as this European Commission guide suggests, plays an enormously important role in all economies throughout the European Union.
It accounts for nearly 20% throughout the European Union.
It accounts for nearly 20% of European GDP.
If we turn to to the entrepreneurial discovery process which is the core of smart specialisation.
This is a process in which the smart state is supposed to identify new research and innovation priorities alongside firms and universities and other research institutes for example.
But many regional governments still cling to what is called the "Linear Model of Innovation" in the mistaken belief that more science inputs equal more innovation outputs.
That is what we call the "Linear Model of Innovation".
And there is a very big disconnect here, a big contradiction here, between the academy, for example, where the linear model was declared dead over 20 years ago because it was ineffective .
So while it was declared dead in the academy the linear model seems to be alive and well in the worlds of policy and practice because governments simply continue to invest in science in the assumption that it would automatically lead to more innovation.
What can be done about this problem?
A problem that I call,
"University Science Silos".
What can be done?
I'll show you what can be done later in regional policy examples where regions are trying to encourage their universities to work hand-in-glove with smart firms.
A final dimension.
A final aspect of the smart state is the idea that region elites are really committed to innovation.
But as we know, there are many underperforming elites in regions throughout the European union.
And underperforming regional elites correlate strongly with low quality of government and poor innovation.
What do we need to do about underperforming elites?
We need to hold them to account through both bottom-up local pressure and top-down pressure from above.
The bottom-up pressure can come from local civil society, for example.
One example of that, would be the Integrity Pacts being developed by
Transparency International to hold public bodies to account for the way they spend public money.
But pressure can also be brought from the national and European levels by new conditionalities which are placed on regional elites.
Like the ex-ante conditionality in smart specialisation, for example.
Which means that smart specialisation strategies are a requirement before you can expect to win regional policy funds
It is a legal requirement to have a
Smart Specialisation Strategy in place.
My final point about the smart state in Europe is this:
Over the past 8 years the public sector has been eviscerated .
Really cut back deeply.
Because many governments are still in thrall to what I call a pre-keynesian creed that aims to eliminate the budget deficit and shrink the state.
A shrunken state in my experience is a disempowered state; that lacks the capacity to offer smart state solution.
And the real problem is this:
The public sector becoming more important, not less important, to innovation strategies because innovation itself now is evolving from a narrow conception around science and technology to a much wider conception of societal innovation.
When we think of innovation in key sectors like healthcare socialcare, education energy, transport, agrifood or the built environment, in all these sectors the public sector makes a major contribution to smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.
These are sectors what I call the societal challenge sectors in which the State looms large in every sector.
And therefore it is - it is counterproductive to assume that the public sector can be displaced from these sectors when it plays such a major role.
