So what I have tried to do so far,
Is to look at debates on the state.
Secondly, I've looked at key aspects of the smart state.
And now finally I want to turn my attention to some good examples of regions which are trying to do innovative things through smart state policies.
I've been working for many years with regional governments and regional development agents throughout the European Union, and I've identified a number of good practices over the years.
For twenty years, I've been working in the Basque country, which has been one of the pioneers of regional innovation policy in the European Union.
And it's developed, in my view, one of the best Smart Specialization
Strategies in the European Union.
And these good practice examples include the policy continuity which has been established in the Basque country.
For over thirty years, the
Basque government has committed to spending on research, design, and development.
And that has created an
R&D infrastructure which allows firms to engage with that infrastructure, and to use it as a platform for their own R&D investments.
A second example from the Basque country would be policy novelty.
Not only have they had policy continuity, but they've introduced new aspects to their policy mix.
For example, like cluster associations.
Now they're introducing entrepreneurial discovery processes.
And in these entrepreneurial discovery processes and spaces, businesses and technology centers, and regional government work hand in glove. And the key aspect of the Basque strategy that I think merits attention is the idea of distributed leadership.
That is to say, at the beginning of the strategy, the Basque government will play  a strong, forceful role by establishing the rules of the game.
Once it's established that, the rules of the game, it will step back and allow businesses, universities, and research centers to come forward and take the lead.
That's a very important example of a Smart Specialization Strategy which is a regional strategy rather than a governmental strategy my second example comes from
South Moravia in the Czech Republic.
When I've worked in South Moravia,
I've worked with a JIC, which is the regional innovation agency.
And when I've asked them to sum up, to distill, the lessons of their success, this is what they've said to me: they've emphasized, first of all, the role of strong, stable political commitments to regional innovation policy, just as we saw in the case of the Basque country.
Stable political commitment, they say, is a must.
Secondly, keeping a strategic focus on results.
Knowing what we want to do first, because the money comes second, they emphasize.
Whereas many regions, the first priority is securing the money, sometimes when they don't have ideas what to do with the money.
Thirdly, the need to get the best people on board in these new innovation networks, because without the best people on board, you don't get the trust in the process.
And trust, as we know, is a unique asset in development, because trust has  value but no price.
You can't buy trust.
You can only earn it, by discharging your obligations to your partners.
What the Americans call,
"Walking the talk".
Another example of their success, they say, is being constantly in the field, being exposed to new actors, to new ideas.
And feeding back, that word again, feedback.
Honest, rapid, real-time feedback, to keep the policy fresh. And new.
And relevant.
Another example from them, from South Moravia, would be, the need for robust government structures to protect the space around new policy initiatives.
To give it the oxygen it needs to develop.
And then finally, being close to state of the art research.
The South Moravians have always been close to these projects.
Projects called,
"Creative Regional Advantage" the Smart Specialization platform in Seville.
And our own project, "Smart Spec", a project led by Cardiff University, and funded by the
FP7 European program.
All these things are examples of good practice from South Moravia.
And in my view, they all constitute key aspects of the Smart State.
My final example comes from my own country, Wales, where there's been a major change in regional innovation policy over the years.
We used to have a top-down and state-led regional innovation policy, which led to some big disasters.
Like our Technium network, for example, which we described looking back as a
"cathedral in the desert" because it created large technology centers which were underutilized.
Learning from that example, the Welsh government now tries to build an ecosystem of innovation, in which firms, government, and universities work closely together.
That's sometimes referred to as the triple helix in regional innovation policy studies.
And two examples from Wales:
First of all, from my own university,
Cardiff University, where we're trying to build a new innovation campus, where the accent is on translational research, research which is close to market.
And there, we are working with IQE, a world leader in compound semiconductor technology, which makes the smart, energy efficient chips which go into all of our smartphones, for example.
Working with partners like IQE gives us what we'd never had before: which is to say, a demand-side partner that could help us to valorize, or commercialize, our knowledge.
A second example from Wales would be
Swansea University's work in the Specific Project, which is about creating a renewable energy ecosystem where, once again, firms are working closely with a university, particularly with its
Materials Science center, a world-class center of Materials Science.
Both in Cardiff and in Swansea, we see that these partnerships both aim to integrate demand and supply,
And they are the keys to the valorization of knowledge, which help us to overcome the problems of the university science silo, which I identified earlier on.
These three examples from the Basque country, South Moravia, Wales, are just three examples of where the regional state is trying to act in new ways.
To try to act as an animateur and a curator of innovation.
And these are examples of the regional state playing a more catalytic role in the smart specialization process, by building organizational capacity in the public sector, by using its convening power to broker new networks in the region, and by using its curating capacity to foster translocal networks and value chains, like the Vanguard initiative in the European Union, which is an attempt for regions and firms to work across different regions to develop new technologies in advanced manufacturing, for example, in 3D printing. It's a good example of regions coming together, to work across borders.
To sum up, smart state bodies are valued for their competence in the network, not for their status in the hierarchy, as used to be the case in the past.
And now these smart state bodies are learning to deploy their soft powers.
Powers like their curating capacity, like their convening power.
To deploy these soft powers in concert with hard powers, like tax, regulation, and procurement, and these are the secret ingredients, I think, of the smart state in action.
So what I've tried to do in this session,
I've tried to do three things:
I've tried to look at new debates on the role of the state, in economic development and innovation.
Secondly, I've tried to look at key aspects of the smart state.
And thirdly, I've tried to look at good practice examples from regions around the European Union, particularly the Basque country,
South Moravia, and Wales.
And in this final slide,
I simply want to sum up by emphasizing three key points.
Firstly, smart states can make a big difference to innovation and development, if they have the institutional capacity and the political leadership to do so.
I believe this is a point that's been recognized throughout the history of political economy, from the days of Adam Smith's
"Wealth of Nations" onwards:
The leading role of enlightened government.
The second point I want to emphasize is that while smart specialization presupposes a smart state, a smart state is far from being the norm today, in the European public sector because it's stymied by the lack of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, the lack of feedback, the low priority attached to learning, and above all, by the fear of failure.
And my final point is this: shrinking the state is counterproductive, because a smart public sector is a key actor in this era of place based innovation and societal challenges.
Challenges like healthcare.
Like the built environment.
Like renewable energy, sustainable mobility.
In all these sectors, these societal challenge sectors, the state looms large, especially in our lagging regions.
Thank you.
