Hello, and welcome everybody.
In the last two weeks, we discussed a lot the design of a Smart Specialization Strategy
And how we can get operational with it.
Also Smart Specialization is a special strategic tool.
Many of the issues we discussed are relevant for any kind of regional economic strategy.
For example, the strengths and weaknesses that are summarized in the smart analysis for a region usually should be the starting point for any kind of regional economic strategy and not only for Smart
Specialization Strategies.
But Smart Specialization is special and has special properties, which we might have forgotten a little bit about in the last two weeks with all that detailed discussion on design and how to get operational.
Therefore, I think it is worth the time to repeat some of the most important properties of Smart Specialization.
Again, keep in mind what we know about operationality now.
The first point is the overall goal of Smart Specialization.
It is to achieve structural change in the economy.
Smart Specialization has a lot to do with innovation, with entrepreneurship, with new developments, but it's not the goal by itself to have new developments, you always have to keep in mind that you want to achieve structural change for your economy, and not only to create new activities.
That might be part of how to get operationally, but the overall goal is always the structural change.
One of the most important properties of Smart Specialization is that you have to make choices.
Smart Specialization forces you to set your priorities.
That is, because smart specialization relies on achieving the scales necessary to come to structural change: the scales in entrepreneurship, the scales in innovation.
If you try to be best in class in any kind of field, in every possible area, then you'll probably never achieve the necessary scales in any of these to really arrive at structural change, so you have to make your choices, you have to focus on certain areas, and rely on these areas for the
Smart Specialization Strategy.
Not making these choices is also some kind of choice, to do everything, and that won't be very fruitful.
So, make your choices and set your priorities.
It is important that you do your choice on the right level.
It is not on an industry level, for example, the tourism industry or the investment goods industry, are too broad for a Smart
Specialization Strategy.
It's such a broad field that you probably won't arrive at the advantage of scale in these fields, and therefore not generate the momentum to really come to structural change.
On the other hand, you should not look at the project level, this is too narrow to really have the power, even if you have scale within that project, it's probably too narrow to have the power to achieve a structural change, therefore, it is somewhere in between.
Of course, an in-between is not clearly defined, and there's probably not a right and a wrong, but a continuum of better suited, less suited priority areas, but it is clear that it is somewhere between the industry and project level.
If you take the above serious, then the next property of Smart
Specialization is already clear.
But still it is very important and I want to therefore point again to it: you need a sound base of evidence to design a Smart Specialization
Strategy successfully.
If your choice is to not rely on such a base of evidence, then the chances that your choices are not the best ones for your region are much higher than when you have such a good base of evidence.
Therefore, the analytical part of designing such a strategy is a crucial element of it.
But the base of evidence, the economic structure, the location factors, what is available in the region, is not all you need.
When you design a Smart
Specialization Strategy, it's not your task to find the new innovation policy, to do innovation yourself, or even invent new technologies.
It is about combining existing opportunities.
And to know the opportunities, you not only need to base off evidence, the economic side, but also you need to know the entrepreneurial resources available in your region.
They might be from the university area, or innovation or research labs, there might be startups or entrepreneurs active in your region.
All these resources should be applied in a Smart Specialization Strategy, and the goal is to combine them in such a way that you achieve the scales necessary to come to our overall goal of structural change.
Within a Smart Specialization
Strategy, you make choices.
Choices can be right or wrong, there's always a risk.
Of course you should make well-informed choices, this is what the two above properties are from, the base of evidence and the entrepreneurial activities.
But still, you won't have all information you might need for the best choice, for the optimal choice.
And there will be wrong choices.
Therefore it is important that you understand Smart Specialization, not only as using entrepreneurial activities, but as an entrepreneurial process itself.
That's what we call the entrepreneurial discovery process.
This also implies that priority areas are not there forever.
In a certain time, maybe five years, maybe ten years, but in a certain time, you should define, within your strategy, these priority areas either should  be successful, entrepreneurially successful, and then have grown so much, and led to structural change, that they're not any more part of a Smart Specialization, but, if necessary, might be supported by other kinds of policies, or, they haven't achieved that goal.
Then after a certain time it's not worth following that path anymore, and you should probably discard them.
Finally, there's the question for which region smart Specialization Strategy is appropriate.
It is very easy, because we talk about entrepreneurship, and innovation, to think for a region that's a high tech industry, say, very good in ICT or in internet of things,
To define a Smart
Specialization Strategy.
But for many other regions, it's not that straightforward because they do not have the ability to be top in class in these high tech areas.
Still, the thinking of Smart
Specialization, the concept and the strategy building, is valid for these kinds of regions as well, it's just about combining the existing economic structure with applying the new technologies to the existing industry, the existing assets in the region, which will lead to successful priority areas.
Also, the overall goal is structural change.
So is a Smart Specialization strategy only good for regions which really indeed need a structural change?
No. Structural change is something which happens always, and even a successful region can profit from more structural change, towards more competitive, to higher productive industries.
So the thinking of Smart
Specialization, the concept, can help any kind of region, regardless of their focus areas, regardless of their economic structure, and regardless of their development stage.
It is a way to improve the economy, regardless where you start from.
Now from these properties, what can we derive to the process how to design a Smart Specialization
Strategy from  that?
First of all, it should be a structured process.
It has a lot of elements, a lot of demanding elements actually, and so if you don't structure the process up ahead, it will probably be very difficult to reach the best solution.
Secondly, it involves many people, many stakeholders.
We look at the economic structure, we have the government, the people who define the Smart
Specialization Strategy, you also need the entrepreneurial resources, so there are many people, many stakeholders involved, and the process should reflect that.
Involve the stakeholders, give responsibility to them, and make them part of your
Smart specialization Strategy.
Finally, the strategy needs evidence and data.
We discussed that often enough.
Now as the process has to be structured, there are certain elements which, in our opinion are very important to be part of such a structuring.
The first element of the five we identified, the first element is to define the region.
It is that everybody knows for which region, for which definition, the strategy should work.
And it also creates commitment towards this region, and towards the strategy therefore.
Then we have two analytical blocks.
The one is the base of evidence, the economic structure, the assets we can build on, the location quality, the competitiveness of the industries.
On the other side we have the entrepreneurial resources.
Entrepreneurs, startup companies,
Innovation, universities, all these kinds of players.
Both sides have to be analyzed, detailed, and put together for the strategy.
Then it is very important to make choices, and this is by choosing your priority areas.
There should be more than one, but there should not be too many, depending of course on the size of the region, of the potential you have to follow such a strategy, there can be a few more or a few less.
And finally, with the thinking of entrepreneurship, also for the
Smart Specialization Strategy, not only applying it in the strategy,
But also thinking of the whole process as an entrepreneurial process.
You must monitor, evaluate, and, if necessary, adapt your strategy. It's not a one-off for all times, but do that.
So these are the five steps.
Define your region, analyze your economic structure, assess the entrepreneurial activities
Available in your region, choose priority areas, and finally, Monitor and evaluate the development of your strategy.
Now as the base of evidence is one of the central elements of designing a Smart
Specialization Strategy, we want to have a look in a bit more detail in this again.
And we identified six steps which might be useful to generate or to achieve that base of evidence.
The first step is the economic performance, where does the region come from,
What has been achieved in history?
What are the starting positions here?
Then, second, we will look where we are at the moment.
What are our location qualities?
For what kind of activities is the region attractive?
For other kinds it might be less attractive.
Third, we look at the industry structure, in particular about the competitiveness of these industries.
Can they compete on a global base, or are they more local oriented?
What are their properties?
Now all these three steps are usually done in a comparing mode.
You look at your relative position compared to other regions, to other economies.
Particularly with competition that is just at the core of the concept.
But we do need a more detailed analysis, a step further into details within the region, and that is the fourth step here, we really look into the region,
Where are the industrial focus areas?
Specifically, in more detail, where are clusters, and what is the region's innovation system, which we can build on?
Then in the next step we broaden our view again.
We look at the global megatrends and general purpose technologies.
These are development traits that are the same for all types of regions.
The general purpose technologies like ICT, or the digitization of the economy, or megatrends like aging, all regions are hit by that, or influenced by that, not necessarily hit.
But every region is differently exposed to these trends, and can make different use of them.
So therefore, it's not only knowing these trends, but also analyzing them, what do they mean for my region, given all the above information we already have?
And finally, the sixth step, and quite important, is to bring all that information together.
Many of these informations influence each other, and we need to have a complete overview of them, and that's what we do with a SWOT analysis, an analysis of strengths, weaknesses, chances, and risks.
Now that sounds like a very complicated process, and indeed it is.
It is not easy to come to a
Smart Specialization Strategy, particularly not a good Smart
Specialization Strategy.
But don't worry too much.
One of the properties of Smart
Specialization is the entrepreneurial thinking.
Just try, make the best choices you can given the information you have.
Follow them up, monitor them, and, if necessary, adapt them.
And with that, it will work.
So, don't worry.
Think entrepreneurial.
Thank you.
