Now that our environment is ready, we can start working with Octave or Mat Lab.
First we must define our objects called variables, it can be numbers, vectors, matrices, and later we'll see something else.
But first you must choose a name for these variables in order to define them.
It is not necessary to declare a variable.
Its size and type are set automatically.
So for example, if I want to set the variable at - 3,4 I can simply type A equal - 3.4 and
Mat Lab or Octave recognizes automatically the size and value of this variable.
I can simply define column vectors.
At that time, I have to use brackets.
For example [- 3.1, further 1 semicolon
4.9, I close the brackets.
And again, the variable b is computationally created and defined size 1 by 2.
Now I can also set row vectors.
The same principle only that instead of the semicolon, I just have to put a space.
-2 space 1 4,67 I close the brackets.
And here's my new variable.
With the same principle, we can define matrices of a size we can decide. D equals 2, 3 and 0, that is the first line.
And the second line: - 4, 5, 6.
We have seen that the semicolon separates the lines and the spaces separates the columns.
When defining a matrix, we will first define the first line and then the second.
The variable name is important to be able to reuse it thereafter for example within a program.
We have an open choice for the name, but it must begin with a letter. For example, if you start with a number
12 A equals 3, it will not work.
And indeed, you have an error.
Also you have a limitation regarding the length of your name is the name (length) max.
It will tell you the maximum length in terms of characters in your variable.
Also, be aware that if you have a lowercase variable and a variable named almost the same, but in capital letters,
Mat Lab will consider these two variables as different.
And, if I minus one from the other,
I'll see there is a difference. Names must begin with a letter, the number of characters must be less than 63, which is still very large, and I have to be careful if
I write in lowercase or uppercase.
They say the program is case sensitive.
In your choice, be careful not to use the name an existing variable.
For example, there is the sine function.
You write sin 3 times Pi, Pi is an existing variable in Octave, it gives about 0.
Now I do sin 3, it gives another number.
But , if you mistakenly define sin 3 equals 2, what happens
We will define a new variable different from the function with 3 entries, because we put the 3 in brackets, and will be filled with a 0 and a 2.
Now when you want to calculate sin of 3, you find the variable that you defined yourself.
If you want to recover the old, clean the variable sin.
Now, if I do sin 3 with the arrows, I find again the value of the function.
You must also be careful there are words called reserved words, that can not be used.
We will see it later, but they are for example: for, end, function and many others.
I just spoke of Pi, Pi the number that is more used in mathematics and if I want to see it,
I can type Pi and I get 3.1416. Now,  we known it's not the value of Pi we know every day.
We would like to know some more figures.
Then we can ask our Octave program or Mat Lab to display more digits. Anyway, we won't have the exact value of Pi, we will have a good approximation.
You can still change the format.
For example, having a lot of significant figures but in scientific format. So now I have
3.1415 times
10 raised to 0 therefore times 1.
Now I can also do Pi times 100 and
I see that the only change I have is at the power of
10 in the end.
To know more about the format,type help format and there is a whole series of help is displayed
After you can play them on your screen.
