Move on to the matrices.
Thus, a matrix is ​​very similar to a vector only it has several lines and several columns.
Let us define a matrix with two rows.
For example, I can take a 3.5, that's the first line.
And on the second, 3, 4 minus 2.
Considering that.
So I have the same symbol with brackets at the beginning and the end, to show when it starts and when it ends.
And here I have matrix A.
If I want to write all these in one line.
I'll take a second matrix.
I'll take the same size, one of times 3.
But when defining, I will not go to the line.
So I do 0, 2, 4.
And then we said what is a line it is a semicolon,
So a semicolon then 1; 5.3 less 0.3.
I close the brackets.
And it is a matrix of the same size.
So, I can also do addition operations, and a scalar multiplication.
So a new matrix C.
I can set it as A - 2 times B.
We see it is the right size, the same size of A and B.
I did the operations.
I can also concatenate two matrices.
For example, matrix A and matrix B.
I get the two matrices, A and B, one beside the other.
But now, I cannot do the sum between A and this new matrix because they do not have compatible sizes.
Let's see now, what we can do with these matrices A, B and D.
So for example, I can concatenate the matrix
D with another matrix.
So for example, I'll take D.
Now, I put it together, but on another line.
So, I'll see the matrix D and the next.
Thus, for example, 2 times D on different lines.
If I look at the size of D it's a 2 by 6 matrix.
If I look at the size of this new matrix, it's a 4 by 6 matrix.
I doubled the lines.
So I can extract, like I did for the vectors, some of the matrix inputs.
Only that a matrix, has two indexes.
So for example, I can take the index 2, 3.
If I want to extract several matrix inputs once
I can for example take the lines 2, 3 and the columns 4 and 6.
And I get a 2 by 2 matrix.
We can also do a matrix transposition.
So if I take the A we used earlier and
I tranpose it with the same symbol, I get a 3 by 2 matrix.
Therefore, the inputs are matrix A transpose.
There are also special matrices.
You can define a matrix with only 0s.
So, I use the same function as earlier, 0.
Now, instead of what gave
4, 1 or 1, 4 for a vector, it gave the matrix size.
So, I'll take a zero matrix, of size
3 by 4.
And, equivalently, there is a matrix which is filled by 1 with the command 1.
And again, I can take the size 3, 4.
There is a special matrix which is the matrix I.
And in general, it is used to build identity matrix.
So I, I can define it, this I, 3 by 3.
I get identity matrix.
In reality, what this function I does is to produce a matrix of the desired size with on the main diagonal,
1s and 0s elsewhere.
So, is it possible to build a diagonal matrix from a vector containing the values ​ of the diagonal?
We must first define this vector V.
So, for example 1, 2, 3 and 4.
You see now, instead of putting commas between the numbers I put a space.
This is equivalent.
I can put commas or put spaces.
Now I have a line vector.
I can define a diagonal matrix using the diag function.
In fact, I can use the command diag to extract the diagonal of a matrix.
So do the inverse operation.
So when I look at A, I can extract the main diagonal, here, it'll be 1, 4.
I define the vector U as the diagonal of
A.
I get a column vector 1, 4.
If I want the row vector at this point,
I have to transpose the diag A.
