Sometimes we want to make operations element by element, i.e, not to do a mathematical multiplication or matrices or vectors, but only work with components.
They are called the element by element operations.
Let us look first at the A we had earlier
What does it mean A plus a number?
In mathematics, this is not defined as we can just add 2 to all entries of A.
Here, I did A plus 2 and what happened is that all the coefficients of A were changed and added by 2.
Now I will extract the first column of A.
So for the first column of A,
I take all the elements of the lines, so I take 2 points and then
I make 1 and say
I want the first column.
I get 2, 1, 0, effectively.
Now the second column.
Now I can do the sum and the sum is, as we've said already, element by element.
So there is no problem.
I can also do multiplication element by element, but
I do not have the right to use the multiplication sign, we've already seen if the matrices on the vector are not compatible, we have no right to do this multiplication.
But,I can put in star point it element by element.
This star point means it will do a multiplication of vectors A1 and A2, element by element.
You can see it also in this way, you take A1, A2 is just to verify, andbA1 times A2, we see that the third column is formed by multiplications of the first, but element by element.
The latter is just to check.
Similarly, we may want to make the power input of entries of one vector of a matrix.
The power is written, for example
I'll do 2 to the power of 3.
I use the little hat.
Can I do the same thing, but with all the elements of A?
Yes, but with the point and then the hat.
Now each entry of A1 is raised to 3, cubed.
I can also do an operation where the power is done using A2 inputs.
Now, as you see, if I enter the hat A, it writes a new character.
If you have this problem, you have a
French keyboard
For example Swiss French or French where it will complete the hat with A in putting an emphasis on A then you have to enter hat, space, and then A.
Now I can take A2 and the inputs that's all the A inputs one by one powered to corresponding inpust of A2.
In the same way, I can do division element by element.
Then inf and nan, why this?
So we changed our multiplication earlier, why do I now have a inf and nan?
The first line here, I have 2 divided by
3 equals 0.6666, it's okay.
The second line, I have 1 divided by 0.
In mathematics, it is not defined, we can not divide a number by 0 so, Mat Lab or Octave replace it by inf.
If we do 0 divided by 0 it's slightly different, it is not infinite, but it's just not defined at all.
Instead of using the infinity symbol, we use the symbol not a number.
You know now how to work with vectors or matrices.
The operations are defined as a linear algebra.
It is possible to multiply a matrix by a vector, or matrix with the matrix if sizes are compatible.
It is also possible to solve a problem
AB equal AX with simple commands.
It is also possible to do operations element by element, allowing us to do operations like multiplication, power between vectors or matrices of the same size.
