So let us first move to the conceptualization of smart urban energy systems.
And we will do this in three steps
First, we identify the drivers towards smart urban energy systems.
Then we will conceptualize the evolution of the urban energy smart system.
And finally, we will present the three layers of transition.
Now let's look at the drivers.
So the smart urban energy systems are the result of three main drivers and they are all at the same level.
But let's first mention the evolution of urban infrastructure technologies.
There are energy technologies that are changing, and we will talk a little bit later about that.
But with decentralized production.
Renewable energies.
There are technologies in transport that are changing, that affect urban energy.
Like electric vehicles, electric buses, electric bicycles, electric charging stations that go with it.
There are housing technologies that are changing.
Houses become more self-sufficient, are producing themselves energy or electricity.
There are changes in district heating.
In pump storage.
So the first important driver is really the fact that technologies around the energy sector are changing.
The second driver is of course climate change resource efficiency.
Cities are big polluters.
And are one of the drivers of smarter urban energy systems is of course the desire to reduce Co2 emissions, and to become more energy self-sufficient.
And the third driver is as core of our MOOC, of course, is digitalization. 
Actually digitalization as we will see is the vehicle by which urban energy systems can become smart.
Now let's look at the main dynamics of these urban energy systems.
Now, traditionally, energy works like this:
It is produced in a very centralized way by big power plants.
Then electricity is transmitted into the city
And in the city it is distributed to households and to firms, to areas, to airports, to shopping malls.
It is very linear from centralized production to decentralized distribution process.
Now what is changing?
First thing that changes is the production process.
We are moving from centralized production to decentralized generation.
Of course there is still centralized production, but it becomes less important as areas, factories, households are generating their own electricity. 
And are feeding some of this electricity back into the grid at certain times.
The second major change, is from plant production to intermittent generation. 
And this is basically the result of production of electricity thanks to renewables.
Here in the examples of solar and wind.
Now these kind of electricity production can happen at a decentralized level, but it can of course also happen in very massive plants at the centralized level, and then fed back into the grid.
The third major dynamics is one that relates to prices.
Rather than having fixed prices, increasingly, we have price signals.
And this relates to consumption, in the sense that consumers household areas they can now store their energy at decentralized batteries, feedback the energy and maybe it is stored in a dam somewhere.
That is when prices are high, the energy is fed back into the grid.
When prices are low it is consumed again.
And all this is being automatized.
And this is one of the core features of smart urban energy systems.
Is this automatic reaction of devices to price signals. 
Like the fridge turning off at moments when prices are passing a certain threshold.
And turning on again when prices get cheaper.
Now what are the main layers of transition?
Now here we have the urban electricity system first.
As I present it before it is an integrated system where firms, areas, households are self-generating, feeding into the grid, and of course there is still electricity coming from outside.
But what is interesting in urban energy systems is the fact that there is a larger environment that is all related to energy and electricity.
The urban sociotechnical system.
Let us take examples:
Factories.
Not only do they produce and store but they can themselves be active in energy matters.
Cars.
Cars are running on electricity.
They charge electricity at certain hours.
The same for electric buses.
For electric bicycles.
Households are totally...
Houses are related.
Buildings are related to the electricity system by consuming and feeding back in.
The gas production is related to the electricity system.
Water.
Water, waste water, you can make energy from waste.
And all this together forms sort of the urban ecosystem that influences the smart urban electricity system.
Now the layers of transition are the ones that we have already identified in the previous week.
Namely, first the layer of infrastructure and here we start to now talk about smart grid.
This is the grid that is capable to handle all this intermittency.
A grid that is capable to handle the flow's bidirectional flows.
Then we talk about the service's layer, smart urban energy services.
Basically meaning that
 we don't just have a consumer.
Consumers are at the same time prosumers. 
And the services become much more complex.
Not just simply buying electricity. 
It's also about saving electricity, about managing,
And then at the core of it is of course the digital, or the data layer, which makes these kinds of things possible.
Which makes smart urban energy systems possible.
So we will, from here go into these three layers in detail.
Stay tuned.
