Welcome back to the course. 
It is my pleasure today to discuss with Yves Corrodi.
He's the Head of Strategy of IWB which stands for the Utility of the Region of Basel. 
This utility is original in the sense that it is integrated.
It covers several infrastructures, water, telecommunications, district heating and of course, electricity.
Another key feature of this utility is that they source 100% of their electricity from renewables. 
So welcome Yves . 
Thank you for the invitation. 
So, as an integrated utility, what kind of links do you make?
Or do you foresee between the electricity, the smart electricity system and the other infrastructure,
 urban infrastructure systems?
There are a lot of interference within a lot of dimensions.
Regarding a technical dimension,
There are, phenomenally you can observe within the electric grid itself such as an increase of PV, local PV Systems, but also between other infrastructures such as heat pumps, as a new heating source, or storage systems of different medias, or, are as example, electrical mobility. 
This will interfere with each other and it is our role to combine these trends. 
So those, I mean, those are the technical linkages you see, but how about, we always in this course talk also about social-technical system, the institutional aspects, what are other linkages on the institutional side?
There are a lot other dimensions such as the political dimension. 
I'm thinking of the CO2 agreement, the Paris agreement about the CO2 emissions which sets clear goals which are inline with our company goals or I'm thinking about the economical dimension.
There are a market liberalizations in the electricity markets such as we have observed in Germany which will affect us, or there are simply social, the social dimensions.
We want to provide a good living quality, a good infrastructure and services to our inhabitants and customers.
So, for an integrated utility like yours, I mean, what kind of opportunities do you see in linking the smart urban electricity system with the other infrastructures. 
There are a lot of trends nowadays, 
I mentioned previously that decentralization, but there might also be the digitization which has to be mentioned 
For example, we have this initiative together with the local trade association 
Smart Regio Basel
Smart Regio Basel, but we want to increase the sustainability, the living quality, the efficiency within the area of Basel, and probably, there might be in general three initiatives at the beginning. 
So, of course we want to increase the smartness of our infrastructure, the inter-connections between these infrastructures, but we might also want to provide data based on this infrastructure and might also provide data openly which could attract new businesses. 
But, first idea might be to establish a new market place, a digital market place where can be services locally exchanged and in order to keep the value chain within the region. 
So, in order to seize all these opportunities, what kind of challenges do you foresee? 
There are a lot of challenges; there are financial challenges, there are regulatory challenges, there are challenges about competences, 
But probably at the very beginning of this association, the goal should be to bring the people together, to have a collaboration between all these actors and stakeholders. 
So you say that we should start with collaboration but you know, there are many actors that could organize why do you think utility and integrated utility like yours is well particularly well positioned to organize
 such collaboration. 
Of course, there are a lot of stakeholders that can start such an initiative, however, I would, you could think about layers, so there's an infrastructure layer.
There might be a data layer on top based on this infrastructure and based on the data and the infrastructure, you can provide applications and projects of this information and data.
So like a project or innovator layer and of course, utility brings in a lot of infrastructure and a lot of data.
So I think we have possession to support this association. 
Okay, thank you very much for your insights. 
Thank you very much. 
