Welcome back to the course. 
Now, in this session, we're going discuss the challenges that result from the transition to smart urban energy infrastructures and we will do this in two steps. 
First, we will put the urban energy infrastructures into context and then we will outline the main actors that are involved in managing these infrastructures. 
Now let's look at the context. 
Now, we have already presented the three main drivers of smart urban energy systems. 
The decentralized generation, the intermittent generation, and then the changes in consumption due to the price signals. 
Now, let's look at this in a little bit more concrete fashion.
So, we have four things. 
First, we have alternative urban energy sources. 
We have talked earlier about wind energy, about local wind production, local solar production, but we should also mention geothermal energy that is increasingly important in cities, as well as, energy produced from waste. 
Then, we have much more efficient, energy efficient consumption patterns, 
This results from more efficient houses, more efficient areas, more efficient factories, more efficient transportation, more efficient recycling and waste management. 
Third, we have semi or entirely off grid electricity operations that is electricity operations that at times consume, at times feed back into the urban electricity system, and finally, we have new emerging storage solutions that can be in vehicles, that can be in houses, that can bigger, even in factories. 
Now, all these four elements lead to challenges in managing the urban energy infrastructure, the urban energy grid, something that is called smart grid today.
So let us now look at the different actors that are involved in urban electricity systems. 
Now we have already talked about the whole production chain from extraction to conversion, to transmission that would be outside of the city to distribution, storage, and producing and consuming inside the city. 
Those would typically be the urban energy infrastructure.
Now, there are a series of actors that are involved here and these actors all interact with each other and ultimately have to be coordinated.
Let's start with from bottom to top.
So there are the prosumers as we have said, the ones who consume electricity and produce electricity at the same time, 
Those can be household and industry. 
Then, we have decentralized electricity producers who can be the same as the prosumers, but they can also be producers on their own in the sense of waste facility that produces electricity. 
Then we have storage operators which can be transport operators or storage operators on their own.
Then we have distributors.
Typically, we have an urban electricity energy distributor but with off and semi off grids, we may have new distributors that have to interact, that have to be coordinated. 
But the challenge is not just limited to the city because also the transmission system operator, or operators, there may be several, are concerned, namely, those are the actors that feed the electricity into the city and at times may even take back electricity to be stored in one of the dams as we have seen before. 
Then there are the centralized electricity producers that need to be coordinated, and finally, there are the traders, the ones who fluidify consumption and prosumption of electricity by linking all the actors together. 
Now, the challenge here is to manage  these interactions and to coordinate all these actors among themselves, and digitalization is both the cause of this and the answer to this.
It is thanks to digitalization that all these different actors can even emerge and play a role in smart urban energy systems but it is also thanks to digitalization that these actors can now be coordinated and managed so as to make smart urban electricity infrastructures function.
Now, in the next session, you will hear from a colleague of mine at EPFL who is an expert on smart grids, stay tuned. 
