Hello. 
And welcome back to the course. 
Today I have the pleasure of talking to Professor Mario Paolone, who is chairing the Distributed
Electrical Systems Laboratory at EPFL.
He's an expert on the topic of smart grids, and he's doing very interesting research at EPFL. 
Thank you very much, Mario for being with us. 
It's a pleasure Mohamad, to be with you.
As the first question, 
I would like to ask you about the key challenges in managing smart grids for cities?
Okay. Well, in smart grids as you know, there is a built in assumption mainly, that a big fraction of the electricity is being generated in a distributed manner.
Essentially true in renewables, mainly PVs, that can be roof top can be centralized power plants, wind turbines, etc.
Now, the integration of these resources poses two challenges.
The first one is that these resources are not centralized, namely, they are dispersed on the territory.
They are very large in number, and they are stochastic.
In the sense that they are difficult to control. 
Not from the technical point of view, but from the aggregated perspective.
Therefore, there are two essential requirements in technology needs of smart grids.
The first one are the tools that we call situation awareness tools.
Essentially, you need to have a way to provide the sensing as well as the  situation awareness to automators, or to operators that knows exactly which is the status of the asset in quasi real-time, and with a very high refresh rate.
A refresh rate that I can mention are in the range of tens or hundreds of milliseconds. 
Okay?
In systems which are pretty big in size, that can be a neighbourhood, a city, a country, or even an entire continent. 
So, that's the first requirement, to observe and to sense the system status. 
A little bit is how automatic cars are doing with the technology called auto-pilots. 
You have to build the kind of situation which is surrounding the vehicle. 
The second requirement, the second technological requirement is the capability to control the systems with bulk stochastic generation in a controlled fashion.
And this means to use storage. 
The set where we are now, it's a battery. 
It's a Lithium titanium battery.
And this is one of the asset that we need in future smart grids to enable the controllability of stochastic resources, to be able to control, to provide services to the power system at the local level.
And this, the second element, that you need to develop.
Good. 
As the second question, you mentioned the role of technology called challenges that we have.
But can you also elaborate a little bit more on how technology is also providing the solution for these challenges?
Yeah. I go back to the first technological aspect/dimension namely the sensing.
I make you a comparison with the - again, the example of a car. Okay?
So in the car you have a system that has a physical system.
That's a size of a few meters. 
So, the sensors are essentially located nearby each other. 
So, you don't need to synchronize them.
Because the physical dimension of the system is rather small.
In power systems, in smart grids as I said, your system can have the minimum size of a neighborhood, or it can go up to a country, or a continent.
Now, if you sense quantities which are that are collected in a fashion, in points which are separated by kilometers, or hundreds of kilometers.
You know speed of light is finite. 
So, you end up in having delays in collecting this information. 
So, what we typically do is that we adopt state of the art time synchronism mechanism, that can be either GPS, namely satellite synchronization system.
Satellite like GPS, GLONASS, or Galileo systems, or can be time synchronisms which are brought into the internet.
There are protocols called
Precision Time Protocols,
PTP technologies, that you typically use to synchronize the clock of your computer, right?
With time accuracy which is relatively low we look for technologies which are much more deterministic than this one. 
For instance, we are taking a technology that is used by CERN to synchronize their oscilloscopes on the Large Hadron Collider, is called the White Rabbit, the name of this protocol.
And we are taking it and adapting to time synchronization in smart grids. 
With these kinds of protocol, you typically have jitters of the measurements in the range of few nanoseconds.
So this enables you to collect and time align all your measurements, and then feed the situational awareness tools that are essentially reconstructing the system state with a very high fidelity and a very high frame rate.
So, that's the first kind of technology that we make use.
What do you do once we have that?
Essentially, you share this situation of your system with the automators.
And the automators are essentially local intelligence that are taking the control of your small asset, your small TV, this battery, a controllable load, analytical vehicle charger, and whatsoever.
So, you share this to the system, and these devices they, by knowing the state of the system they essentially take intelligent action by negotiating each other. Okay?
So, this is more on the software development part.
Then you need also physical systems, like this battery.
As I said, having the capacity, the capability of storing energy in a very efficient way and release it in a, also controllable way, it's one of the key aspects of smart grids.
So this kind of battery was not really imaginable few years ago. 
It's a device that has round-trip efficiency above 95 percent. Okay?
Just to give you a number. 
Irrespective of the state of charge, and of the power that you are extracting or injecting into the system.
It has a ramp rate, so it can generate a ramp of power of about 20 megawatts a second, which is a ramp of power which is very similar to state of the art large turbines.
But this is an asset that you can take and move it.
So, it's a very peculiar system.
And the third aspect that you have is that the cost of this kind of technology is going to be down with the almost aquadratic law
So if you look at the cost of this device, was in the range of several thousands of Swiss Francs, or Euros if you want, a few years ago,
Now we are talking about hundreds of US dollars per kilowatt hour. 
And, last but not least, the life cycle of these devices.
This asset in particular can do more than 15,000 cycles.
So if you measure to a cycle a day it will last 15,000 days, namely several decades.
Which is a good aspect, and fundamental aspect for utilities.
Because in the power industry, the assets, typically, they last for 20, 25 years.
So having a storage system can have similar performances in terms of life cycle, it's fundamental.
Great.
So the technology is somehow there you know, to have the smart grids. 
But also, you know, the institutions, regulation, and management is often a challenge in these socio-technical systems.
Can you elaborate a little bit on the managerial and regulation challenges in smart grids?
That's also very good question. 
So talking about this asset, for instance, we're talking about energy storage. 
So typically, these kind of devices will be used by power utilities.
Which are not supposed to own energy storage because you know in unbundled markets they can do energy arbitration. 
In the sense, they can influence the demand and they can purchase energy and store energy.
When if the market is very cheap, they can know it in advance and then resell the energy when the prices are higher, to their customers.
So this kind of asset which are meant to add flexibility to the systems, they should be using a different way.
In this specific case, the regulatory bodies that have to develop tools to certify that these kind of assets are used only to avoid grid reinforcement, namely in support of the grid, and not to do energy arbitration.
Just to make an example.
The second example 
I can make about regulatory needs, is about the use of smart meters, for instance.
In situational systems, nowadays technology allows us to infer the state of the system, including the nodal power injection absorption's, even if you don't directly meter it.
Which means I can observe what the customer is doing even if I don't place a meter in his house.
And this might generate privacy issues and discussions for this kind of application.
So, yep, there is a lot  to do. 
And last, but not least, it's how the regulatory board will fraction and divide the costs of the grid between transmission, distribution,
(INAUDIBLE).
Having these kinds of assets means that you give to the operators the opportunity to locally balance the power flows.
Meaning that the transmission system will be used less in the future, but with a cost that the rent will be even higher.
So, who is paying for this cost?
How we transfer these costs to the customers, with which mechanisms?
These are questions that I don't know whether are still open.
Great.
Thank you very much Mario.
It was very insightful for our participants.
Thank you Mohamed, and thank you again for the invitation. 
