Welcome back.
In this session, we will talk about smart urban energy services.
In particular, we will talk about what these services exactly are and who can provide them. 
Let us look now at what these smart urban energy services exactly are.
So, we have already mentioned in session two, the three main dynamics that are taking place in urban energy.
The move from centralized production to decentralized generation, the move from planned production to intermittent generation and then all these price signals that relate
to the whole automatization of this process. 
Now, there are four types of customers of such smart urban energy services.
There are households, you and me. 
There are entire buildings with a lot of households in it. 
Then, there are commercial or industrial areas, like for example, an airport or a shopping mall, and then there is another type of customer, those are the distribution and transmissions system operators who will buy balancing energy. 
So here you have three types of services; smart energy services. 
The first one, very clearly attributable to the grid operators is the balancing energy.
The energy that these operators need in order to keep the grid stable. 
Then there are the services that relate to demand-side management.
At this point, those are purely services in terms of electricity.
Basically, you offer the services to households, buildings, commercial and industrial areas, in terms of managing their demand of electricity much more efficiently in relationship to price signals, for example. 
And then, a little bit broader are the smart and integrated services and urban energy services.
Those are the services that now link the electricity, urban electricity system with other systems, with the water system, with the transport system with the batteries for the car, with the waste, with the recycling and also there, the same customer households, buildings, commercial areas, can receive these kinds of integrated smart energy services. 
Who are the providers of these services?
Now, in the core, we have of course as we have said, the dynamics, the digitalization that favors all this and you will see how that affects the providers. 
So, typically, the traditional providers are the electricity distribution companies within a city.
They can offer demand side management to all the different customers that we have seen and they also to a certain extent offer smart and integrated energy services by venturing into other, into waste, into transport, for example, if they operate the charging station of the local bus system or if they operate some sought of batteries for shopping malls and other commercial areas. 
But those are legacy operators. 
Then, we have urban utilities.
By that, we mean the type of companies that are not traditionally in the electricity, in the urban electricity business, but they are in our urban water distributors, urban waste managers, urban public transport operators, and they can now offer these integrated energy services and offer also balancing services by linking the consumption patterns of the household, and linking that to energy consumption. 
And then, there are what we call intermediaries. 
Those are new operators that have not been in the urban business at all. 
They basically, produce devices or have information like telecom operators for example. 
They have information about your electricity consumption and they can manage that consumption and sell the services both to you as a customer or as an industrial area, and to the balancing, to the great companies that need balancing energy.
That is actually an interesting business model that we see appearing in many cities. 
But this is also possible thanks to what we call peer to peer operators. 
That is also called energy commons or electricity commons where customers get together and do this kind of demand side management together.
Sought of taking out the intermediaries themselves. 
Now, we can see new comers in all of these areas, and so potentially, the smart urban energy services can be provided increasingly by operators that come from outside the city, operators that have no history in infrastructures. 
And I think that's the real novelty in smart urban energy services. 
