Welcome back. 
In this session, we will now talk about urban energy systems data layer, that is the real novelty in smart cities and in smart urban energy systems, and we will do this in three steps.
First, how to think this data layer
Then, the two visions that one can apply to this and then, thirdly,  the  questions that this two visions have raised.
So, lets fist look at how to think the urban energy systems
 data layer. 
Now this picture, we have already seen in week one, where we said that the digital or the data layer is the novelty of smart cities, or smart urban energy systems in this case. 
Now, first, there are data being generated and these data 
are basically generated from three different sources.
There are data about user behaviour, there are data general electricity or energy generators behaviour. how much is consumed, how much is produced, and then very importantly, there are data about the behaviour of the grid, in this case, the distribution grid, as a function of user and generator behaviour. 
On the basis of this data, there are urban, smart urban energy services providers, and this looks like this, the services as we have seen in the previous session are offered to different, different types of customers and there are different types of services that are being offered but all they have in common is that they use the data that has so being generated. 
Now, let's look at the two visions that are possible for this, and the first vision, really pertains to the, and it's an integrated view of data generation and data usage for services provision. 
This is typically the vision that can, that is held by electricity utilities that have the data about generation and that also want to provide the services on the basis of these data. 
There may be some related companies that access to the infrastructure but basically here the vision is, that this is integrated. 
All the data generation and the services are integrated, and there are the different companies that own these data and offer the services are competing against each other, not sharing this data.  
The second vision is totally different in the sense that there are data platforms and the different data generators feed all these data into the platforms, and then the services providers take the information from these platforms and develop different types of services to different types of customers as a result of that. 
Now, this leads to very different questions. 
The first question on the left side, if we have integrated data generation and services, this basically considers data as a good. 
It's something that somebody has produced, that somebody uses in order to create services and basically the question here is, who owns the data?
The users, the utility, the devise producers, for example. 
And this raises the question of regulation, but from this point of view, regulation is basically a competition regulation. 
You need to make sure that there is sufficient competition here and that ownership rights are respected in this kind of competition. 
No market distortion, no tendency to monopoly, things like that
On the other side, if we data as a platform, as a shared platform, the question is, who owns this platform, or not even necessarily owns the platform but who manages this platform?
And in terms of regulation, the approach also is totally different because you will end up with some sort of infrastructure type regulation.
Access to the data, availability of the data, transparency of the data, prices of the data, all questions of that sort. 
So we can see that there are really two different types of visions leading to two different types of regulating dealing ultimately with this data. 
Now that we have discussed the three different layers, let's ask Schneider Electric how they see the smart urban energy system. 
So stay tuned. 
