Welcome back.
Now to conclude this second week, we are gong to talk about the managerial and policy takeaways from our discussion about smart urban energy systems. 
Let's first talk about the managerial takeaways.
And we have structured this along the three layers and the main relevant dimensions. 
So the first big challenge for managers from a technological perspective is of course the question of great stability. 
Because of intermittency, because of renewable decentralized production, because of price signals and increasingly volatile price signals, the whole grid stability becomes,
I would say, the main challenge for urban, smart urban energy systems managers.
Then from an economic perspective, there is the whole question of allocating the cost of moving to smart urban energy systems.
The upgrading that need to be done, who ultimately pays for what?
On the services layer, it's normally an economic question in the sense of these smart urban energy services, what are the underlying businesses of these services, who will pay for these services, who wants to pay for the services, is there a market for the services?
And more from a social perspective, this is the question of user acceptance or ultimately, user uptake. 
Will they use or buy these kind of services?
On the data layer, there are technological questions in terms of status standards, interoperability of data and questions of data security that managers have to face. 
And finally, also from an economic perspective, this is the whole question of the pricing of the data.
What is the right pricing of this data so that ultimately the market will uptake the services and at the same time, the cost for upgrading, for moving into a smart urban energy systems are covered.
So let's now look the takeaways for policy makers along the same structure as previously; the different layers, the different dimensions.
I think the first challenge for policy makers are the whole question of legacy cost.
We have traditional energy systems, big power plans, transmission grid, costly transmission grids, and as a result of smart urban energy systems, more independent may be less consumption, the question comes up as to who bears these legacy costs and how to finance these legacy costs.
Then, more from a jurisdictional perspective, it is of course also the question of the relative independence of an urban energy system, 
We know that all energy and electricity systems are interconnected with each other and so the question, the policy question here is really what is the relevant entity?
Is it the city in itself, but we know that the city is a political entity and often from a system perspective does not necessarily make sense.
May be more the metropolitan area here. 
On the services layer, and from an economic perspective, there is the whole question of regulating certain services and certain prices of services, for example, we have seen that balancing services is one of the smart urban energy services that is being offered, but balancing energy is heavily regulated, and so there  is policy action and policy is challenged also in this area. 
From the social perspective, there's the whole question of Universal Services Obligation. 
Is there a minimum amount of energy, smart urban energy services, that the citizens are entitled to, at what price, how affordable is it, when can they be cut off, for example?
And then on the data layer, there are a series
 of policy questions
The question from a technological perspective, it's also the question of access to data, rights of access to data.
On economic, from an economic perspective, it's the whole question of data ownership. 
Who owns the data?
What are the prices for that data, and then, of course, the whole question of financing the different digital infrastructures that have to be put into place. 
On the social side, I think the big policy challenges are privacy, which of course, will affect whether the users will ultimately use the services or not. 
And to conclude, I think the most fundamental questions that policy makers have to ask themselves is whether they want consider in an urban system that the data on smart urban energy data as a good, as a commercial good, or as a platform, and this kind of question will have the answer to this kind of question, will have huge regulatory implications which then policy makers will have to follow up on. 
To conclude this second week, we have seen the three main layers of smart urban energy systems.
We have talked about the infrastructure layer, the services layer and the data layer and have illustrated this with a series of presentations and interviews with experts. 
Then, we have seen what the main managerial and policy takeaways are form this.
Now, in the next week, we will talk about smart urban transportation systems. 
So stay tuned. 
