Welcome back to the course. 
We have the pleasure of having 
Mr. Matthias Bölke with us today.
He is the CEO and country president of Schneider Electric Austria and Switzerland. 
Matthias, thank you very much for having us.
Thank you for having me !
My first question is the following, what do you see as the main differences between the management of legacy energy systems and emerging smart energy systems?
Right. 
So the existing legacy system in place, is in place since the beginning of the electrification, you can say, right. 
So, that means we have three main characteristics; the production of the electricity, the grid itself towards distribution and then the sales. 
The production is basically, was and is still, done by big power plants using basically coil, oil, water, and nuclear resources, right. 
That's what it is today, and those power plants are then injecting the current in the existing grid. 
Then it comes to distribution, the second part.
The distribution is basically a top down grid today where you can say the current is almost flowing every time in the same direction from the power plant to the end user and it's a grid which is today more electro-mechanical than anything else. 
Some automation is into stabilize the friction of the grid, to balance the between the power plant and the end user I'd say, between the user and the load.
And the third part is the sales. 
Legacy was a regulated system, for sure. 
Power plant and grid in one end, so, regulated prices as well, stable prizes, high margins and also end users could not really change the supplier, right. 
So, this ecosystem, this whole ecosystem is now a huge transformation, basically because of two things,
First, we have now an affordable way to alternative energy. 
And second, we have digitalization in the electricity which is as you can imagine, a big, big thing. 
Driven, all that, by sustainability because we know that we have a growing population on earth especially for cities.
We're talking about smart cities, right?
We have now the figure, we've doubled our energy consumptions to  2050 from now. 
We have to divide CO2 emissions if we want to stop climate change, and this is now changing really dramatically, the ecosystem of the energy grid for the future, and already happening now. 
And it's influencing all these three things, production, distribution and sales. 
The production, we'll go away from these centralized power plants to a decentralized way to produce.
The distribution grid is really a change from vertical topology to  horizontal grids, highly automated, highly digitalized and for the sales, ecosystem will go away from a regulated system to a deregulated market, open market, where the end user can choose his supply of electricity and energy, right. 
Where a lot of more trading happen, a lot of more flexibility happen, so that really, the whole system is changing dramatically. 
Matthias, what do yo see as main benefits and risk associated with the emergence of smart energy systems for cities?
Well Maxime, clearly I see much more benefits and risks, right? 
But, let's talk about both, right. 
Listen, if you see a smart grid deployment, a smart campus deployment in a given city, right, is for me a highly attractive, right, for  a major or for the official bodies of the city for instance. 
If you see we have this, this sought of production. 
We have the smart energy grid, we have new ways of trading between producers and consumers, right.
We have prosumers which are even out of the scene.
The same guy can produce the energy, sell the energy, use energy or buy the energy, all of this in a very smart way. 
I mean here, so, are lot of new functions, new business to come, new jobs to come, right. 
But this is highly attractive and a big benefit for a given city, right. 
We have stability in the grid, which is decentralized approach as well. and we have the suspect of sustainability, and sustainability is for me an also clearly attractiveness of the future of a given city, right. 
Now, if you see more digitalization and more smartness in the grid gives us much more visibility.
So visibility means we can see where for instance we are wasting energy, right. 
So this is also a clear benefit and if we even can correlate then process data, this energy data,
I mean process data for instance, for production, can be SAP ordering system in plants, or can be a patient system in a given hospital, can be data about moments of people in a hotel. 
If you correlate those process data, then again, we see energy view in real time, you really can save energy, you really can make the system much more efficient. and you can have also some good inputs to the effectiveness of the process itself, which is also a huge benefit.
So on the technical level, 
I see also a lot of different benefits.
Now it comes to questions to risks, right, so that, we're talking about much more data now once a system, much more digitalization software and so on. 
So people tend to think and to say that we have highly risk, and may be also instability of this kind of things which is in my view not the case because a true network of things is always more stable than centralized or legacy system here, when the plant is not operating anymore you have a huge problem, 
Instead in a decentralized way, when one producer is not going well, the rest of the system can be very very stabilizing, right. 
And then, there are data in this. 
There is this question about data security, cyber security, data privacy as well, for sure.
This is certainly a risk, but the business model and the driver behind this new world, this new world change is so big and so important that I truly believe that those two points; cyber security and data privacy will be solved. 
Matthias, last question. 
What would you say are  the main technical and institutional conditions to guarantee a successful transition for legacy energy system to smart energy systems?
Now Maxime, I think the technical preconditions are there almost, right, so we're building today such smart city approaches already and smart energy approaches, we have today. 
There are a lot of components available in the market today where you have highly intelligence in.
The electrical grid can be equipped today by a lot of components which have incorporated a chip which is measuring the current and imitating data
 in the same time, right.
So this is not very expensive and you have by definition a huge visibility,  if you do it right from the start you have the preconditions, and then you have software on it, this data handling big data aggregation, and such kinds of things which are already today
available too. and you can use it, we are doing this already. 
So I would say on the technical way, a lot of things are available today.
Now, you need to make sure that you stay with an open system that you can collaborate.
You need to integrate new things.
We have to think about just for instance electrical charging infrastructure for electrical vehicles, so we need this to be extended.
Batteries are playing an important role but you need to implement for instance traffic control.
You need to integrate a water system.
You need to integrate may be a city information system to the city center service.
That's why it's very important to choose an open system and to have a big collaboration between relevant players in a given part, right. 
Then you asked about governance or out the legal aspects, et cetera.
For me it's very important that you have, that you can gather important player around the table to design, to build an agenda, and then to roll out such a kind of project. 
So this is who?
This is basically the governance of a city, of a region, of a state, so governmental aspect is important.
We have private investors, investment banks, development banks, but also private guys in a given city which can contribute a lot. 
We have guys as us, me, you know, industrial suppliers.
So, we are doing electricity but we also have ICT, we have other service suppliers in the city, so the private sector 
I would say.
And then, very important from the beginning is certainly, the integration of the citizens in the city. 
So you have a good buy-end in the concept,
Those people are contributing because it's all about behaviour. it's about the perception of what it can be, changed, so that you take the people on board.
And this can be either through associations for instance.
Think about the relevant associations you have. 
You can take them in,
NGOs as well. 
So you have the voice
of the customer in your project, right. 
Then you have very important utilities which are delivering energies to the system, water, gas, electricity, but also more services, partly ICT services and other services, because they are
transforming a lot now, so they can have with really a stake in it. 
And last but not least, you need really guys which are planners infrastructure planners but also electrical guys  which can plan the whole system then and can design it, and can then bring it to an agenda. 
So, I would say then to have a good governance, on a smart city project or on an energy campus project, you have different ways to do it.
You can for instance have a performance contracting where a city is outsourcing the contracting part, and you have a pay with them for party things, you can have a designed built operate model where really the city is going to gift the whole thing to an external supplier, and who would then take care about the running model of your system. 
There are software as a service, 
It's a big thing coming where we are using cloud services and where the data you need, are some how in a clear governance, and can be used
 for next steps of services.
So that also very important. 
So I think the name of the game is all about, let's say collaboration, about integration, having the right stakeholder around the table, as much as you can. 
Of course there's a question of governance and to take it forward but, our experience has said this collaboration and integration of all the stakeholders is really mandatory to be successful then in such kind of  projects. thank you very much Matthias for answering our questions. 
You're welcome, thank you. 
