Introduction to Chapter 1
A Resilient Future: Science and Technology for Disaster Risk Reduction
Well, I was going down towards Kalikasthan and in Shanti Bazaar 
I was distracted for a while
Then on the way, near the Chinese Bridge, there is an electric pole which you might have noticed.
Suddenly, I was caught by the earthquake at this place.
At that time, I knew nothing about what was happening.
The sound of Gandaki (river); ... vibrations of the ground... vibrations due to the earthquake
Suddenly, the road tore apart, stones were falling from uphill and the debris covered the road
I managed to run... but got injured one friend died we were three, 
I was injured but I survived.
The other friend was behind and got less injured.
Dear participants, 
Welcome to chapter 1 of the MOOC,
A Resilient Future: Science and Technology for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Unfortunately, natural hazards such as the 2015 earthquake in Nepal, or more recently in Italy, can cause large losses.
A first step to reduce the risks is to know the characteristics of these phenomena.
Therefore, in this first chapter,
EPFL lecturers will walk you through the characteristics of earthquakes, as well as floods and landslides, the three natural hazards on which this MOOC will focus.
Furthermore, the basic concepts of Disaster Risk Reduction will be explained.
Science and technology will be defined in the context of this MOOC, and the week will end with an interview with UNISDR Secretary-General,
Dr. Glasser.
The questions addressed by this first MOOC chapter, are the following:
What are natural disasters, especially landslides, floods and earthquakes?
How do we define hazard, disaster, risk, vulnerability and disaster risk reduction?
A central aspect of this MOOC, is its focus on science and technology.
So we need to know what we mean by science and technology, and why they are important for DRR.
The entire team of the MOOC,
A Resilient Future: Science and Technology for Disaster Risk Reduction, welcomes you to the first chapter, and we hope that you will enjoy it.
