Electrical energy is the primary problem, the energy is insufficient. which leads to recurrent power cuts and from these power cuts, there are voltage variations when it is turned back on and a lot of expensive devices are damaged.
So that is the first issue.
Once we lost at the same time the water pump, that supplies the water tower, because the power generator had been overloaded and it started delivering over 600V, it damaged a lot of hospital equipment, even the x-ray machine was damaged.
So the primary problem is energy.
It causes multiple machines to break down the oxygen extractors are burnt out, incubators are burnt out, but equally in the post-mortem service, there are recurring break-downs because of the fluctuation problems with electric energy
And it is the same for the equipment: lamps among others, burn out often and that is an added cost for the hospital upkeep.
So, it's not easy!
When I got to this hospital, the power generator didn't work and even today there is a failure with this generator
I haven't been able to find the right part for 2 weeks.
So in terms of power cuts we really need to find it. because, considering our resources
I cannot buy the brand new part.
It costs around a million, so I am hesitant,
I am getting people to look on the second-hand market if we can find something, it will be that!
The most tenacious and recurrent problems from our point of view is, the unavailability of electric energy the series of consequences is imaginable even by someone who doesn't work at the hospital and who came to be treated at the hospital.
When there was a power cut, the machines are fragile and can break down.
From this point of view, there are statistics provided by institutions like the World Health Organisation or the World Bank
Even a lot of hospitals are not connected to this source, before we even talk about availability problems.
So the diagnostic devices are weakened there are for example preservation chains for products, for reagents, that can be broken and you would thus lose these reagents and you can lose the machines as well, not to mention a pending analysis and when there is no more electricity, the consequences are imaginable by everyone.
You see the work done by CURES for example at the University Research Center for Energy in Healthcare at the National Advanced School of Engineering is trying to address a major issue in the district hospitals,
The energy and the quality of the energy, we know that a lot in the quality of the service depends on the quality of the energy.
And innovative solutions are being researched at the moment in this research center to really bring something revolutionary to our environment even if that seems unimportant in other environments but we are here and we need these revolutionary solutions, locally revolutionary that allow us to keep a good quality of service the quality and functionality of the equipment, and the sustainability of these equipment and in the end save money, in the long term, for the whole country.
That is what this research center is for.
