Now we'll hear from Dr. Heiko Gebauer, leader of the Business Innovation for Sustainable Infrastructure 
Services Group at Eawag.
He'll be joined by Caroline Soule, a researcher at Eawag's Department of Environmental Social Sciences and together they'll present their work on market-based approaches for delivering sustainable water services in low income countries.
During these days you might heard quite a lot about the word <i>business model</i> and <i>business model innovations,</i> so it became quite popular.
If you hear <i>business model</i> you might already have some association in mind what it actually means.
Basically <i>business model</i> more or less describes the logic of organization, how to create and capture value.
In the next couple of minutes we try to answer three questions.
First of all, what are business model innovations and how can they actually contribute to household water treatment systems?
Finally, how can different elements in the business model be altered?
So business models, to be clear, refer to non-profit organizations, but also the profit-oriented companies.
And naturally in the household water treatment systems we somewhat quite often talk about non-profits.
But non-profit doesn't necessarily mean that you don't charge your people, so you also try to recover some of your cost, and organizations like OSHO, the Oromo Self-Help group in Ethiopia are trying to give their water filter there for free but then try to charge the [inaudible] charge for the material to their customers.
And customers make a nominal contribution to the water filter as well.
Profit-oriented companies like Unilever, of course, they try to make money with the water filters.
The idea is to sell them above the manufacturing cost so you have sufficient revenues and profits to finance your company.
And in between non-profit organizations and profit-oriented companies an interesting new type of business model is actually emerging, and this business model are so called <i>social businesses.</i>
They're innovative in a way because they try to combine economic but also social goals.
An example would be Hydrologic from Cambodia and the social goal is to make household water filters affordable, but also desirable for rural families in Cambodia, but, on the other hand, also to recover their costs and to finance the distribution channels and the manufacturing of the filters.
If you work with business models, the most common way is to do it with the business model canvases.
For profit-oriented companies these canvases normally have nine elements.
You start from the right to the left, from the customer segments, to customer relationship, to distribution marketing, and also the value proposition.
And then you take your key activities, key resources, and key partners as well.
These elements are based on the fundamental of every business that's about revenues and costs.
And if you want to work with that you basically have to answer three questions.
First of all, what value do I deliver to my customers?
What value do I offer to my customers?
And how do I capture value, and how do I finance my business?
And for non-profit organizations these canvases might look a little bit different.
Here you decide or distinguish into
Donor model canvases,
Beneficiary model canvases.
For Donor models it's very much about the value propositions for the donors, and for the Beneficiaries is about the impact metrics, so what kind of social impact you try to achieve, and you try to combine these different business model canvases in order to make your whole approach, your whole implementation of business model financially sustainable.
As part of any of these business models for social businesses, non-profit organizations, or profit-oriented ones, it's important to understand who is your actual customer, and what's your market environment.
And this market environment is typically called the <i>BOP market.</i>
BOP stands for the <i>Base of the Pyramid.</i>
The base of the pyramid describes people living close to the poverty line with a handful of dollars per day.
The question is, how you can understand the benefits, but also the needs and the preferences these people actually have.
And we don't want to go into any details here, but there's a lot of literature actually describing, based on the pyramid's strategies, subsistence marketeers, market places, but also how you could get out of poverty, or even how you make business solutions for poverty.
Here are just examples of books and links, your guide for follow-ups in order to better understand how you can really make your products and services affordable for the BOP market, but also desirable.
So let's come to the next question.
How can business model innovation actually contribute to household water treatment systems?
If you look into how household water treatment systems should go into the market, how can we penetrate the market, you typically start with a pilot phase that hopefully you can prove that the distribution and sales of your household water treatment system become financially sustainable.
And then when the pilot becomes successful, you try to scale up to reach a higher market penetration to sell more filters.
Then finally that you can scale up in terms of social impact but also in terms of your financial contributions and the finances you need to get from a pilot to a scale.
Unilever started the CSR business model.
In the CSR projects, for years they experimented, they're finding new ways in creating a mini water treatment plant that can finally become a basic household water filter.
They made a lot of design changes and a lot of cost reductions in order to make this kind of household water filter, the Compact 14 Liters filters; desirable but also affordable.
By introducing it to the market and by also looking into the first commercial successes, but Unilever actually saw that it becomes quite an interesting business for them.
So they re-integrated it into the normal business units.
By seeing actually the commercial success,
Unilever decided to change the business model to a commercial business model.
A key element of this business model was going through different kinds of sales channels, like your <i>door-to-door</i> but also traditional retail channels to reach a high number of customers.
And if you talk about high number of customers, until now about 57 million people benefit from this kind of filter.
But it also went for Portfolio extensions.
So instead of just going for one filter or maybe a couple of them they really increased the product portfolio.
And this product portfolio no longer addresses only the low income segment, but also more into the middle income but even higher income segments.
All these filters have an aspirational design so they look nice, people really want to desire it and they're nevertheless also affordable.
And when it comes to affordability,
Unilever implemented an interesting business model innovation.
This business model innovation is actually quite close to what I initially introduced with the printer and the ink.
Unilever makes money with selling the filter but also selling consumables, or what we call <i>Germ kill kits.</i>
So after an amount of time we have to replace your Germ kit in your filter, and Unilever makes money of selling these kits in order to finance distribution channels and to have a blink to the existing customers.
By Phase 2, as I said ,
Unilever business model became financially successful and could scale up as well.
Now let's look at the last example.
This is from a Social business.
Social business Hydrologic in Cambodia.
Hydrologic started initially with the idea
"We want to make very cost-effective household water filter."
And by making it very cost effective, they went for a simple design in order to make it very affordable for the people.
And the idea was to sell this kind of design to NGOs that, more or less, can give this filter to the beneficiaries, either by charging for it as well or maybe even giving it away for free.
What they try to do was -- of course that is NGOs if they don't sell it, we have to subsidize the price.
So the NGOs also have to invest into it.
And the whole set up was finally, fortunately in a way, that the manufacturing cost of the household water filter,
Hydrologic Hat, was above the sales price.
And above the sales price means,
Hydrologic had needed donations to finances its business, but also the NGOs needed donations to subsidize the water filter prices.
And now it's the question: 
"How we can change this kind of thing?"
Can you, for example, make it more attractive by adding financial services like micro-credits to it that people might not be able to invest into it but maybe micro-credits might solve the problem?
But interestingly, 
Hydrologic changed even more than just like a financial service.
What they did is really going for aspirational design.
So instead of making the product more cost effective, more affordable, they changed the whole mindset, saying: "No, we want to have something that is aspirational, and which is easy to use for our customers."
And the making aspirational it becomes attractive also for commercial channels.
So today you can buy these filters, not from the NGO but through traditional retail channels in Cambodia.
And by selling more to people
Hydrologic experienced that interestingly, the manufacturing cost went down because by producing more, it means you have higher economies of scale and to reduce your manufacturing cost.
So Hydrologic was actually in the position that the sales price was higher than the manufacturing cost finally.
And the making money with the filter, the whole business model became financially sustainable.
In about two years, about 100,000 filters could be sold.
So Heiko has spoken to you so far about what are business models, what are business model innovations and how can they contribute to household water treatment systems.
Now I'm going to discuss some of the trends we're seeing in business model innovations for water treatment systems.
We published a paper in 2014 which classifies implementation models for water service provision and identify some ways organizations are innovating, which include diversifying their offerings, securing payments, increasing cost recovery, and extending their distribution channels.
Diversification can mean adding additional water treatment products targeted at different customers segments, selling additional products like shampoo and hygiene products. and securing financing via unconventional avenues such as carbon credits, or green, or social impact bonds.
Securing water payments can be achieved by a partnering with mobile payments services such as M-Pesa, and allowing people to access treated water using prepaid cards during times when water retailers would usually be closed.
Cost recovery, an increase in cost transparency can be achieved through local production of equipment and training local staff for repairs.
Additionally, by increasing the density of the distribution of units repairs and replacements can be attended too quickly which reduces losses which would be incurred if there was down time.
Developing professionalized distribution approach can involve multi-channel distribution, which means you can sell door-to-door buy also in supermarkets.
This would involve individual distribution targets, margins and sales volumes for each channel.
Additionally, distribution centers can become service centers which also handle the marketing of new products.
In summary, we've explored what are business models, business model innovations, and what aspects of them can be altered in order for household water treatment systems to reach scale by exploring the journey of three different organizations who have been producing successful household water treatment systems.
I hope you enjoy the rest of the course and the week and good luck on your exam.
