Welcome back.
I hope you had a nice weekend.
Me, I went out and got a haircut.
Last week, you were probably all saying I needed one.
Well, I got one.
But anyway, this week, let's get down to business.
Now that we know all about the different technologies for household water treatment and how they work, let's talk about how to get these technologies into the hands of people, of many people at scale.
In today's module, we'll look at different implementation strategies which are dependent on the main objective of whoever is promoting HWTS.
And regardless of the objective, there are three key ingredients that are required for uptake.
Those are supply and demand, and financing.
Muhammad Yunus, the Nobel prize winning economist, is one of the driving thinkers behind social business models.
He proposes a framework for considering business models depending on whether the principal objective is to maximize financial profits, or to maximize some other social good like public health.
Traditionally, businesses have aimed to maximize profits of course while not-for-profit organizations for example charities, have aimed to maximize social goods.
Yunus proposes a middle way, a social business model in which the principal aim is still to advance a social issue but while covering costs from its operations to repay any invested capital.
So social businesses are not charities and they aim to be financially sustainable.
However, surpluses are not returned to investors as dividends, they're reinvested in the business.
And therefore, ultimately benefit the target population through lower prices, improved service, or greater accessibility.
This framework applies nicely to HWTS.
And I'll give some example of these three different approaches.
Of course these three classes are theoretical, and real world organizations usually fall somewhere on the spectrum in between two or three of the classes.
Well, applying this framework to HWTS, I'm going to restrict our discussion to the low and middle income markets.
There's quite a market for household water treatment in rich countries, but that's not the focus of this course.
In the last ten years or so, there's been quite a lot of excitement about the market potential in low and middle income settings.
Even though these people don't have a lot of money, there are an awful lot of them and they do spend money.
The economist C.K. Prahalad kicked off this interest with his article called The
Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid and a book of the same name a few years later.
Now it's more commonly called the base of the pyramid.
I, I guess it sounds more respectable that way.
But the key insight here is that there around 4 billion people who make less than $2,000 per year, and that conventional markets are not reaching these people at all.
Here, India is particularly important, because while there's an emerging middle class in Indian cities, there are more people living in poverty in India than in all of Africa.
And those 4 billion people spend a lot of money on water.
This 2007 report estimated that the BOP water market was at
$20 billion and growing rapidly.
Of course, that's not all spent on HWTS, but these kinds of numbers are large enough to generate interest among social businesses, and even conventional profit-oriented organizations.
When a conventional business wants to enter a new market, there's a well-established path which looks something like this.
Businesses start by trying to exist and survive, making investments, but not seeing much in the way of returns.
Hopefully, they then start to succeed and scale up, and finally reach a certain stage of maturity, especially when producing something durable like a water filter.
There are heavy investment costs for things like plastic moldings, and large economies of scale that can be realized only after achieving some commercial success.
Now this model doesn't work terribly well for BOP markets.
Some of the basic assumptions and rationales in conventional business thinking don't apply.
Traditional innovation management is very good in creating needs in existing markets.
If there's a market, traditional innovation management can describe how to design new products and services.
But with the BOP, there may be needs but as yet no existing market.
The creation of markets requires the business model to innovate.
A business model is a holistic picture of the logic of a company that describes the various pieces which build the company and collects them to the business and institutional environment.
It also links the different business elements to the customers and enables thinking about different ways of integrating customers into the value proposition.
Well, if companies want to succeed in the
BOP market, they have to innovate not only in products and services, but their entire business models at multiple stages along the, the curve.
They have to be innovative in finding ways to link their business to local institutions and other businesses, and in finding ways of integrating customers in the value creation.
This involves a lot of risk.
And business model innovations are much more likely to fail, than to be successful.
Whether the aim is to maximize profit or some social good, to recover investment costs or not.
Organizations that want to succeed in HWTS need to have business models that include three core elements: demand, supply, and financing.
People have to want to use HWTS.
They have to be able access HWTS products, and somebody needs to pay for the product as well as for the expenses of getting it to the eventual users.
If we draw some tips from the business world, you'll often hear about the four Ps, which are product, having the right product at the right price, promoting it effectively, and having a good place where people can access the products.
This is another way of organizing those three elements of demand, supply, and financing.
UNICEF has taken this four P approach and added two Ps in the context of HWTS.
These are population, finding the right population, and program monitoring and evaluation.
You can read more about it in this document.
How does a profit-oriented business look at HWTS?
So far, the focus has been on the demands of those most able to pay high prices.
And these are upper class consumers, typically in urban areas who tend to be drawn to high end products and durable goods more than to consumables.
There are many products that require electricity and cost hundreds of dollars.
Using processes that we've looked at like reverse osmosis or ultraviolet disinfection, sometimes together.
And companies create demand for these products through commercial marketing, using highly aspirational images.
They strive to create effective messages, and locally relevant value propositions.
While these products are available through well established supply chains devices can be bought in supermarkets or appliance stores and specialty shops, and are primarily sold at a retail price which includes a margin for distribution marketing and profit.
Durable goods tend to be expensive but some companies cross-subsidize by charging less for the initial hardware and relying more on consumables for revenue.
This is sometimes called razors and blades model like handheld razors where the handle is very cheap or even free but the important revenue stream comes from the consumable blades.
Most of the products sold with this model are filters.
Typically, in combination with a disinfection step like chlorine or maybe UV radiation.
And these are a few of the main commercial companies with, with products, but it's not at all a comprehensive list.
Most of these products belong to larger families of businesses and started life as a corporate social responsibility innovation.
Let's take a look at one of these in a bit more detail.
Hindustan Unilever is part of the huge
Unilever Group worth over 40 billion
Euros.
Hindustan Unilever by itself is a big business family with more than 35 brands, mostly in consumer non-durable products like soaps, detergents, and shampoos, but also tea and ice cream.
It's based in India and it has a huge market.
Since the 1990s, Hindustan Unilever's
Corporate Social Responsibility program has been working on a product to improve drinking water, recognizing that both in urban and rural India, people did not have access to safe drinking water.
And importantly, there weren't any effective options available that were well accepted.
Boiling was the main option, but unlike in other parts of the world, boiling was perceived as a burden, expensive, time consuming, and giving treated water an unpleasant, flat taste.
In 2000, the first product was launched.
The Purit Classic with a capacity of 23 liters and available in royal blue and burgundy.
This cost 2,000 rupees, or about $44 at the time.
Soon after, an autofill product was launched for customers with access to tap water, even if the tap water might not be continuous.
And in 2010, the industrial giant, the business giant Tata came out with a household filter called Swatch priced at a 1,000 rupees.
And Unilever, Unilever, immediately followed suit with its Compact model, shown here.
In the same year though, Unilever also aimed at more affluent customers with its Marvella unit, which looks very fancy but also doesn't require electricity.
The Purit product was sold through existing stores where Unilever had strong distribution channels, but also through direct to home network sales.
Which required hiring a force of 10,000 demonstrators who were paid through a combination of salary and commission.
Marketing was aspirational but with a health-based dimension, using the slogan, as safe as boiled water.
By 2010, Unilever had sold nearly 4 million units, and over the next several years, they further refined the product introducing new variants targeting specific customer niches.
In 2014, this is what the Purit family looks like.
You still have these Classic models.
Compact is now called Classic as well.
And there's a new lower cost model called
Intella.
There's also something a little bit higher end, 3,100 rupees.
Marvella is still there, but there but there are higher end Marvella products that do require electricity with UV or RO.
So the entire family spends quite a spectrum of different types of consumers.
Most of Purit sales have probably been to relatively well-off customers.
Next, let's look at social business models.
Here the objective is a social good which is to improve health by reducing exposure to pathogens and drinking water.
To do this there need to be three elements in place, people drinking unsafe water, an effective HWTS product, and consistent use of that product.
Social businesses working on HWTS may face that problem of needs without markets and have to find ways to create demand, supply, and financing instruments.
For demand creation, social businesses typically rely on social marketing approaches.
Targeting particularly vulnerable populations such as rural areas in the base of the pyramid who are more likely to face health problems from unsafe drinking water.
Social marketing can be done through multiple channels, typically involving mass media, but also reinforced through visits to communities and households where demonstrations and trainings can take place.
Products are typically branded and advertised with aspirational messages and images, and done in line with theories of behavior change communication.
Instead of focusing exclusively on health outcomes and negative reinforcement like, you will get sick unless you use this product.
Social marketing of HWTS products invests, involves campaigns that focus on aspirational messages on beauty and cleanliness, overall health and aesthetic improvements.
On the supply side, products are sometimes produced in country.
For example, liquid chlorine solutions and quality control is important.
Distribution channels often have to be built up and may make use of non-commercial human resources like NGOs, health workers or community-based groups in addition to local entrepreneurs.
For financing, social businesses aim to recover costs, at least the cost of the product distributed.
Often other costs like promotion, training and monitoring are subsidized, so that prices don't rise beyond the reach of the vulnerable target populations.
There have been a few attempts to tap into Micro-credit especially for larger expenses like filters.
In the module on ceramic filtration, we looked at two Cambodian companies
RDIC and IDE which could be said to follow a social business model.
Population Services International, or PSI, is one of the largest social marketing organizations in the world and has extensive experience with different HWTS products including the Safe
Water System, Medentech's Aquatabs, and the P&G Purifier of Water.
They've described some of their main lessons and best practices in this nice report, and let's now take a bit closer look at the purifier of water.
Procter & Gamble, or P&G, is another huge, multi-national company.
They manufacture and market over 300 different products around the world.
P&G spent millions of dollars developing
Pur, a combined coagulant flocculant and disinfectant product in its corporate social responsibility program, and then tried to establish it as a commercial product with testing, test marketing for several years in Vietnam,
Guatemala, the Philippines, Morocco, and
Pakistan.
It cost P&G about $0.04 per sachet to produce Pur which can treat ten liters of water, and they tried to sell the product for 0.08 to $0.10 cents per sachet.
P&G learned a lot from these experiments, but after three years when sales did not meet targets, they concluded that the product wasn't likely to become profitable.
So P&G reconsidered its business plan for
Pur and in 2005, committed to a non-commercial approach, where sachets would be sold at production cost, to programs targeting people without safe drinking water, especially children in low income countries.
This proved to be a more successful approach and within a few years, they had sold 57 million sachets compared to only 3 million during the commercial trials.
NGOs and social marketing groups like PSI are key partners now.
And in addition to distribution through social marketing channels, Pur has been very popular for emergency response, in part because it can treat highly turbid waters which cause problems with other products.
P&G is also experimenting with sales to campers in high income settings with the aim of cross subsidizing the main BOP market.
Pur has now been re-branded as the P&G purifier of water and sits firmly in P&G's CSR portfolio.
Well, what about those charities or pure not for profit groups described in UNICEFs framework.
Well, there are not really many groups out there today who don't care at all about cost recovery from consumers.
It's become conventional wisdom in large part because of the successes of social marketing initiatives that when people pay something for products, they become aware of the value and in turn are more motivated to use and maintain them carefully.
So even purely charity driven organizations today will often expect a nominal contribution from users either in cash or in kind through labor and time.
Two examples of not for profit HWTS initiatives are SODIS and Biosand filters as promoted by the
NGO, Clear Cambodia.
With SODIS, the cost of products the plastic bottles, is very small.
Though in some areas, purchasing plastic bottles is a barrier to uptake.
But the main costs of the program are training and social mobilization typically through household visits, and these costs are subsidized through donor support.
Similarly, Clear Cambodia is supported by the charity, Samaritan's Purse, in its Biosand filter projects.
Clear Cambodia had distributed more than
Biosand filters in rural Cambodia, by
They received additional funding from
Samaritan's
Purse to implement another 15,600 new filters.
So they created demand through social mobilization visits to schools and villages, with demonstrations of the Biosand filter technology.
And they trained community health promoters to solicit requests for filters and were tremendously successful, generating
150,000 requests, almost ten times as much demand as their supply plan.
Clear Cambodia then traveled from village to village and built concrete Biosand filters on site.
And then after implementation filters were monitored repeatedly with four visits in the year after installation.
The full cost of one Biosand filter in this project is about $60, including all of the costs associated with distribution and monitoring, and this price is well out of reach of their target population.
Clear Cambodia does sell filters at full price to other
NGOs and government, but filters for the poor are heavily subsidized.
Clear Cambodia does ask for user contributions including a nominal cash contribution of about
$4 US, as well as in-kind contributions of time and materials such as sand.
Also people have to arrange their own transport to the household level which is not trivial, these are heavy things.
And they must also commit to joining promotion meetings and follow-up visits.
Unlike the profit-maximizing approaches of other filters, the main cost of a Biosand filter is the initial construction and distribution.
There are no recurring expenses, and operation and maintenance are relatively easy and free.
One of the biggest barriers to getting
HWTS technologies in the hands of BOP consumers is the high capital costs, especially for durable goods like filters.
Both for-profit companies and social businesses are actively experimenting with innovations in financing that could allow this barrier to be reduced.
A few companies, including Unilever, have tried micro-credit, with initial promising results.
Others have looked at payments and installments or group saving approaches.
And there's a lot of interest in mobile payments, especially in
East Africa where the mobile payment programs MPesa, has seen tremendous success.
And finally, one original approach is to attempt to cross-subsidize the cost of HWTS through carbon credit revenues.
The idea here is that a household practicing HWTS doesn't need to boil the water to make it safe to drink.
So there are savings in terms of biomass burning and carbon dioxide emissions.
However in 2012, the global price of carbon credits crashed and hasn't recovered to its earlier highs.
So it's not clear if this strategy will, will be productive in the future.
The largest example of carbon credit financing in HWTS is that of Vestergaard Frandsen's Carbon for Water project, in which nearly a million Lifestraw family filters were distributed for free throughout western
Kenya, in entire communities.
Distribution was accompanied by massive social mobilization and education and training programs, and the filters alone cost Vestergaard
Frandsen about $30 million US dollars.
Vestergaard Frandsen estimates the total ten year lifetime cost of the program at about $120 million.
In order to get carbon credit revenues, there has to be a strict monitoring program.
Twice a year teams visit ten to 15,000 randomly selected households to see if filters are actually being used.
Vestergaard Frandsen expects to receive credits for reducing about 2.6 million tons of carbon emissions per year.
They've already received their first carbon credits, but are a long way from showing a profit.
In any case, profits would be channeled back into the project in line with their social business orientation.
In this module, I've drawn a lot from an
HWTS training package put together by WHO's
Western Pacific Regional Office.
They have nice materials both for the trainers and the participants, that you can download here.
Regarding drinking water and BOP markets, these are two very useful reports produced by the IFC and the World Resources
Institute again available on the internet.
I've also used a number of journal publications about business models and bottom base of pyramid markets.
Some of these are available for download on the internet as well.
I can especially recommend my colleague at
Eawag, Dr. Heiko Gebauer, who works on business model innovation in the water sector in developing countries.
Check it out.
And finally if you're interested, piqued by the topic, you can learn a lot more about the economic side of water and sanitation in developing countries by signing up for another MOOC right after this one finishes.
This one, on water supply and sanitation policy in developing countries is taught by a
Professor
Dale Whittington from the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and it's going to be great.
You should all sign up.
I already have.
We've only just scratched the surface on the topic of implementation strategies, but I've tried to organize implementation approaches along the lines of the different business models suggested by UNICEF.
And these are also developed further by my colleague at Eawag,
Dr. Heiko Gebauer in his article listed on the last slide.
Check it out.
But, keeping things simple, whatever the business model, you need to make sure that demand, supply, and financing are all in place for HWTS to succeed.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
