Welcome back to our MOOC on basic steps in magnetic resonance.
Today we shall be talking about experimental methods that are the subject of chapter 6 of Peter Hall's book.
This final chapter explains how NMR is really done in practice.
We shall see how the magnetization is excited and then observed and how the time domain signals can be transformed into spectra by Fourier transformation.
We shall explain how one can measure the return of the magnetization to its equilibrium, inversion recovery, for longitudinal relaxation and spin echoes, for transverse relaxation.
There are a few examples of more sophisticated methods such as INEPT, Cosy, Nosy, and HSQC.
Finally, the idea of three-dimensional NMR opens almost infinite possibilities for novel experiments.
Chapter 6 is built up as follows-- we start with a brief discussion of how the experiments are actually done.
To understand these experiments, one has to see what the magnetization does.
And the magnetization is best represented in terms of vectors.
Now equipped with experiments and vectors, we can consider how to measure relaxation times, both longitudinal and transverse relaxation.
And then we can move to some more sophisticated experiments, such as this one-- this acronym means
<i>Insensitive Nuclei Enhanced by Polorization Transfer.</i>
It is one of the most fundamental steps of modern NMR.
Then there are several cases of two-dimensional NMR that will be discussed in some detail- and very briefly, a discussion that we can go from two to three dimensions and thus open the way to a very large number of possibilities.
So the basic NMR experiment as it is done routinely nowadays, consists very simply in applying a radio-frequency pulse to the sample and immediately after detecting a time domain signal which is known as free induction decay.
The rationale is that before we apply the pulse, we have to wait for the magnetization to get aligned with the external magnetic field and achieve an equilibrium value which is determined by Boltzmann's law.
The function of the radio-frequency pulse is to generate a transverse magnetization, either Mx or My which is perpendicular to the o z axis along which the magnetic field is aligned.
Now neither Mx nor My are in an equilibrium positions and therefore the magnetization will try to return to where it came from.
And in doing so, it will actually precess and induce a signal in the radio-frequency coil which will then be amplified and stored in a computer.
Now it turns out that the human eye is not well-equipped to detect frequencies such as this, in contrast to the human ear which can do that very nicely.
Therefore, it turns out if we want to see the frequencies contained in a signal like this, we have to do an operation called a Fourier transform, sometimes written with an italic F or spelled out as <i>Fourier</i> transform.
And this transformation will convert the time domain signal into a frequency domain signal which we routinely call a <i>spectrum.</i>
And in this spectrum individual resonances will lead to peaks.
It turns out that the experiment is not ideal--first of all, we have the sample in a tube-- typically a five or ten mL tube, depending on your NMR spectrometer.
And it turns out that this is immersed in a magnetic field and surrounded by a set of radio-frequency coils.
The magnetic field, the B0 field is parallel with the axis of the sample tube whereas the B1 field which is the radio-frequency field will be perpendicular to the z-axis.
In this arrangement, it turns out that it is mostly the sample that is within the radio-frequency coil that will contribute to the signal, whereas the sample that is at the bottom of the tube or above the R-F coil will not significantly contribute.
Furthermore, if we look at this tube again it turns out that the B0 field is not perfectly homogeneous, so we could imagine that the lines of flux go like this.
And, consequently they are not uniformly distributed.
Now, that's important because if we consider the magnitization in a volume element, also known as a voxel, in the center-- it will be exposed to a more intense field than if we consider a volume element that is somewhere at the edges of the sample.
And it turns out that in the spectrum this volume element here will give rise to a higher frequency going from this contribution here.
So this here will stem from this voxel here.
Whereas this voxel here which is exposed to a less intense magnetic field will give rise to a somewhat lower frequency.
And, clearly, because there are many voxels, we have a distribution and a resultant line shape, which can, in fact, be described by this width here.
Now it turns out that the width of the filled component here is the <i>inherent width,</i> or the true width that is known as delta-mu.
It is the inverse of pi T2, you might want to call this the true T2, a genuine, or homogeneous T2 whereas the width that we have here is the apparent width delta-mu star which is one over pi2 star and so this is the apparent width.
And much of NMR is concerned with fighting this inhomogenous broadening, as it is known-- that is to say that the apparent width is broader than the true width.
This is something that one has to keep in mind throughout chapter 6.
So the key to the understanding of most NMR experiments is that the magnetization vector has three components-- so M is comprised of Mx, My, and Mz and by definition, the longitudinal component z along the z-axis is parallel to the static magnetic field.
Now if the M vector only has a z component and x and y are zero, then it is aligned with the static field and it is in equilibrium and nothing will happen.
So if we want to observe a signal we have to perturb the magnetization and make it transverse.
If it is transverse or if it has a transverse component, x or y, then it will be starting to precess around the magnetic field.
Curiously, the precession frequency is determined by the splitting in the energy diagram divided by h-bar.
Now, that is not obvious at all.
It turns out there is a splitting between the ground state and the excited state, so this is delta-e and this delta-e determines the speed at which the magnetization will precess.
This is a rather peculiar thing and perhaps a a bit difficult for the beginner, but one gets used to this.
Now the sense of precession as you can see in this picture is assumed to be rotating clockwise.
It turns out that there is a bit of an argument about that.
Basically, the clockwise rotation was common in the NMR literature until the mid-80s-- it was mostly used by Ray Freeman who had made many beautiful pictures that used that notation-- and then suddenly in the mid-80s, Richard Ernst at ETH Zurich decided that was wrong and that we really should rotate counter-clockwise.
Now you might say that this is irrelevant but, in fact, it turns out that there is a lot of confusion in the literature about it because people have mixed these two conventions.
This reminds me of a little anecdote about Wolfgang Pauli--
Wolgang Pauli once gave a lecture in the 30s about the sense of rotation of the plane of polarization in some complicated experiment.
And before he started his lecture he predicted that the plane would rotate towards the left and then two hours later, after filling the blackboard with many complicated equations, he found that the plane was rotating the other way.
And he stepped back from his blackboard and said, "Well, ladies and gentlemen,"
"I'm afraid I must have made a mistake in sign somewhere."
And then at the back of the room there was Professor Paul Dirac, another Nobel laureate, who raised his hand and said,
"Dear colleague, I fear you have made an odd number of mistakes in your signs."
That is very cruel, of course, but very appropriate.
In fact, in NMR, one can make many, many sign errors and with some luck they compensate each other but if you are out of luck, they don't.
In this case, Peter Hore has kept a picture which is actually an old one, likewise here, but in the next slides he will move to the continental description.
So in a sense, remember that if you rotate this way, you're OK if you're in a roundabout in England but if you do this in the continent, or the United States, you will be in deep trouble.
So it turns out to understand this precession and the mutation of the magnetization about the field, we have to look at the resultant of the effective field which results from the vectorial addition of the static field, which by convention is always drawn along the z-axis, and the radio-frequency field B-one, which is always in the perpendicular plane, the xy-plane.
So this B1 field is a magnetic component of the electromagnetic field, which is normally applied as an oscillating field along some arbitrary axis.
And this oscillating field, which is a linearly polarized field can be decomposed into two counter-rotating components and it turns out it is sufficient to retain only one of these components which rotates in the same direction as the magnetization and we can neglect the counter-rotating component.
Now, it turns out to be convenient to represent what's going on in a so-called <i>rotating frame</i>, often abbreviated as ROT, which is a frame that is officially called x-prime, y-prime as opposed to x, y although those primes are often dropped in practice.
The frame is defined in such a way that the B1 component which is moving here now appears stationary.
This means that we move with the vector.
If we step on the carousel, we move with the horses so they appear stationary, whereas if we are not on the carousel, we see the horses as moving around.
When we do that, the external field gets reduced in effect and we only have a residual field here.
And at the same time the effective vector, which is still the resultant, the sum of this vector and this vector, is now tilted through a different angle.
In the laboratory frame, this angle theta is very small, in fact the effective field is almost parallel to the z-axis whereas in this case, this angle can be easily made to 90°.
We achieve that by adjusting the frequency of the rotations so that the residual delta-B field disappears.
It turns out that we can redraw this picture in the rotating frame.
In fact, if we start here and we end up here then we simply move like this from the transverse component to the longitudinal component.
If T1 and T2 are equal, we actually go the shortest way, whereas this pathway here, this curved trajectory corresponds to the situation where T2 is shorter than T1.
That means that the transverse magnetization is lost before the longitudinal magnetization recovers.
We can record these signals either by putting an observer here or here.
In this case we would have a cosine wave and in this case it would be a sine wave.
In fact, in modern NMR spectrometers we can detect both x and y components at the same time and we can cook up a complex number which is simply the linear combination of the x component plus i times the y component-- i is the square root of minus one.
And this is built on the principle of the shift operators like Ix plus Iy-- this is the model, a pretty classical counterpart of that.
Now you see that, in fact, we have simply a cosine and sine wave.
Or, if you prefer, we could write Mx of t which is a complex number that contains both the amplitude and the phase.
So this would be the initial value.
It will evolve with the chemical shift-- we could call this i omega zero t and it will also be attenuated by i e to the minus t over T2 where T2 is the time constant of this decay that we see here.
It is interesting to see what happens if we apply a radio-frequency pulse.
So this is the equilibrium position.
This shows what happens if we have a rotating frame where the B1 field that is the static component of the magnetic field of the oscillating electromagnetic field.
If we arrange the rotating frame so that the B1 field is parallel to the x-axis, then we have counter-clockwise rotation, this is the continental convention, of the magnetization towards the minus y-axis.
In fact, in general it will undergo a rotation through a so-called <i>flip-angle</i>, properly called a mutation angle, but flip angle is the common word, and this flip angle is simply proportional to B1, the strength of the field, and the duration of the pulse multiplied by the gyro-magnetic ratio of the nuclei of interest.
So beta can be chosen either to be 90° in which case we end up exactly here but we can also have a 180° pulse
We can also have beta equals 270° in which case we end up on the plus y-axis.
And actually most surprising is the 270°-- if we keep going, we end up at the original position so we can have a 360° pulse.
That surprisingly means that the situation is exactly restored as if there were no pulse at all-- some people have worried what happens with the radio-frequency energy that you have put into the system.
It must somehow go in at one point and come out at some later point.
Now if we are in the rotating frame, the magnetization that was initially flipped along the minus y-axis will start precessing and in effect will build up a phase that we can call phi which is nothing else but the product of omega times t.
And we should remember that this omega is in the rotating frame so it is simply the true precession frequency in the laboratory frame from which we subtract the precession frequency of the rotating frame.
And in fact this turns out to be linearly proportional to time so it is sometimes convenient if we draw time like this and the phase like this we simply have a line with a constant slope and the slope is given by omega.
For the time being this is not very useful but in more sophisticated experiments it will be useful to have such a phase-time diagram.
This concludes part one of this chapter.
Thank you for your attention.
