Hello, and welcome to this fifth chapter of the course of fluid mechanics. This fifth chapter will deal with the kinematics of fluids, in this course of kinematics we will first of all approach today in this first module the difference between the Eulerian approach and the Lagrangian approach, then in a second module we will introduce the definitions of pathlines, of streamlines and of streaklines, in the following module we will see examples and applications before describing more precisely in the forth module the velocity fields and to classify them according to the topology of the flows. Let's address today this fundamental difference between the Eulerian approach and the Lagrangian approach. First of all, what is the notion of kinematics, kinematics is the study of flows and their description without worrying about the forces that are behind the motion. Two fundamental approaches to study kinematics of fluids, an approach so called Lagrangian that is close to what we can do when we are studying physics of solids, material, the physics of material points, the physics of non-deforming solids then an Eulerian approach which is quite adapted to the fluid mechanics. In order to understand the difference we will first of all give a couple of definitions, then secondly I will illustrate the differences between the concepts Eulerian and Lagrangian using an example. Let's start then by the definitions, the Eulerian approach consists in focusing on the velocity, I remind that the bold notation here of small u describes just the notion of velocity, meaning that it is a vector that has three components, a component directed in the x direction, a component directed in the y direction and a component directed in the z direction and this vector is a field therefore it depends on space, i.e. coordinates of a point in space x, y, z and of the instant in time t. It thus the matter of the velocity u(x, y, z, t) in a fixed point in the space M(x, y, z) so
I am fixing a point in space, here M(x, y, z) and I am looking at the value of the velocity vector at this point. It must be clear that in this point will flow different fluid particles. We are looking in fact at the same point in space at different instants but we are looking at different particles.
Let's see what it means. Let's imagine at an instant t0 a particle that I have colored here in green goes through an observation point, it has a velocity vector, here represented in bold, we are here in 2 dimensions as we are working on the plane of the computer, on the plane of the board, but in a generic way it can happen in the 3 dimensional space. So I am looking at this green particle, it has a velocity vector here represented by a bold arrow, slightly towards the top and towards the right. A moment later, at the time t1, the particle that will occupy the same position in space is not the same as the other has gone away with its velocity vector and it is now the orange particle that is occupying the space. This orange particle has a different velocity vector, this time directed towards the bottom and that is also mainly orientated to the right. A little later, at t2, I have this time a new particle, a claret particle that is occupying the place. This claret particle has this time a vector directed upwards and that has a smaller norm therefore that is slower. I have thus observed the velocity field varying in time in a fixed point of space and I have thus seen different particles go by. This is the Eulerian approach. Let's now see the Lagrangian approach, this time we are interested at the velocity which is still a vector of x, y, z and time, but a particle in its motion, so we are following the particle in its motion. This particle is defined by its initial position at the time 0, it was at that moment in x0, y0, z0, then, as time progresses, it will change position.
The Eulerian velocity field is not a fixed field in space, we are not looking at a fixed point in space and watching what happens in time, we are following a particle in its motion and thus we are watching at different points of space, this is what is really really imporant to understand as a difference, here we are following the particle in its motion. What is the result? Let's look at a particle at the instant t0, it is the orange particle, it has this position, it is the same flow as in the Eulerian version, here we are in the
Lagrangian version. The orange particle has a velocity vector slightly directed downwards and it will be joining a new position which is the position of the orange particle which actually matches the position of the particle that we had seen earlier on in Eulerian and it the only time where there is an exact intersection/equivalence between the two formalisms, at this instant t1 the Eulerian velocity field and the Lagrangian velocity field are the same because the Lagrangian particle that I am following, the orange particle, is occupying the Eulerian point of space that I am looking at to measure the velocity field and, a little later on in time, at the time t2, this particle has gone downwards in the corner, it has a velocity vector very small directed dwonwards towards the right, you now really see the clear difference between the Eulerian version and the Lagrangian version. In the Eulerian approach, we have fixed a point in space and we have looked at what was happening in time,  in the Lagrangian approach we are following the particle in time, fundamental difference. This is a good first step, these are definition but we might attempt to take an example a little more concrete to try to better understand the difference between the Eulerian approach and the Lagrangian approach. I am trying here to give you an example of the everyday life, i.e. an example that you could try to imagine yourselves. Imagine that you are a swimmer in a swimming pool with varying depth.
Why a swimming pool with varying depth? I have chosen this example to justify the fact that temperature in this pool is inhomogeneous, meaning that it does not take the same value at different points of space. It is clearly what happens if I take a swimming pool, that I let it heat slowly in the sun since the morning, in the shallow places, the entire thickness of the fluid has been heated whereas the places that are much deeper, the increase of temperature is much slower as the lower fluid does not see the sun and heats up more slowly. There is a lot of matter to heat. Let's imagine that it is for this reason or for a another, that we are thus in this swimming pool which has a cold left side and a warm right side. I have taken here the example of a linear temperature variation, it is the easiest case, what we call a unidirectional constant gradient, the direction it is x that is the horinzontal direction and so I will represent the temperature distribution with a map, it is a map of iso-level or iso-value or iso-contour or iso-surface  the temperature, dark blue indicates cold and light blue indicates warm. It is an example,it has no general values, the reasoning that we will do could be applied in other temperature distributions. Let's consider first of all the first very simple case, it is a case where I am floating but not swimming, so I am stationary and so I feel a temperature that is not changing, the temperature is here of 25° or 24,5°, it does not change.
I have a variation of my temperature, so of the temperature felt by the particle,
I am the particle. This total variation is simply zero. Next case, this time, I am swimming at velocity u. As I am heading in direction, with this velocity u chosen towards the right, my felt temperature so the temperature of the particle is increasing.
Its variation with time: DT/dt is positive, yet, in the Eulerian vision, if
I choose a point in space whatever it is, the temperature is changing in time. You see that for me as a particle my temperature is changing although in the Eulerian vision the temperature is not changing.
I can easily determine how my temperature changes, it changes all the more that I swim faster so that the velocity u is big, and it also changes all the more that I swim in the direction where the temperature gradient is the strongest.
Hence, I obtain the relation represented here in red, that tells me that the variation in time is simply the product between the velocity and the temperature gradient, here that is a gradient that I choose constant in the x direction. Now, next case, this time I am not swimming but the sun is still shinning. If the sun keeps on shinning, the temperature of the pool will keep on increasing. We will assume that it is increasing everywhere in a uniform way but it could also increase in a non-uniform way, so we could go from one inhomogeneous distribution of temperature at the instant 0 to another distribution of temperature at an instant later. Let's imagine that I am not swimming this time, even so, as the sun keeps on heating, the temperature of the pool increases and so in a given point, my temperature variation is increasing. This, DT/dt is positive, but this time it is not positive because
I am swimming in direction of the warm region,
I it simply positive because locally, at the place where I am, the temperature increases. Indeed, for a stationary particle, the Lagrangian vision and the Eulerian vision merge and I thus have the identity that the Lagrangian derivative of T with respect to t is equal to the Eulerian derivative of the temperature with respect to t. We write here the partial derivatives with ∂ and the total derivative, which is the Lagrangian derivative by D or a small d but I prefer
D, the contrast is clearer between the D and ∂. Now, let's consider the most complete situation, i.e. I am swimming on one hand with a velocity U and besides the sun is shinning, so, the temperature variation that I will feel, me, the particle, is DT/Dt that will be equal to the sum of the variation due to the fact that the temperature is evolving because the sun is heating the pool and the fact that I am swimming at a velocity u. This derivative, here, total, we call it total derivative, convective derivative or
Lagrangian derivative. The part that is simple linked to the variation in one point of the temperature field, we call it the
Eulerian derivative or partial derivative.
Then, the last term is a term of advection or transport. I have written here an equation quite general that tells me that I can go from a Lagrangian variation of properties to an Eulerian variation of properties by doing this transformation that we call the Lagrangian derivative transformation.
This is a writing rather limited to a unidirectional case, if I am in a three-dimensional temperature field and that
I am myself going through the space with a vector with three components, then here is the most general expression. We recognize here the velocity field, it is in bold because it is a field, it has three components. I recognize here the operator called the gradient, so the temperature gradient is nothing else but the vector composed of ∂t/∂x, ∂t/∂y, and ∂t/∂z. If I take the dot product of u and the gradient of T, I find the following relation where ux, uy and uz are quite natural notations for the three components of the velocity. Look here at the complex relation quite difficult finally, of the temperature variation of the particle in its motion, so of this Lagrangian concept, as a function of Eulerian information, i.e. the variation in one point and the gradient of the space of my choice as well as the velocity field u.
I hope this concrete example clarifies a little the data for you. In the next module, we will see how to represent a certain number of Lagrangian quantities, particularly the pathlines of particles, but today, to end this module, I would like to show you how we draw of velocity field. There is no big surprises, to draw a velocity field, as it is a field of vectors, we will simply represent this velocity field as a vector field. This means that in each point of space, we cannot do it in each points of space, so we will have to do it in a certain number of points of space, perhaps on a equidistant grid or maybe not on a equidistant grid, it is your freedom. We will represent at a certain number of points of space the velocity vectors and we will take as a rule to represent each velocity vector by a small arrow and this arrow will have an orientation that is the one of the local velocity vector and a length that is proportional to the norm of the velocity. Observe that in this case here, we have the wind above a two-dimensional mountain, it is a case slightly idealized, the wind is blowing from the left to the right, it has a zero velocity here on the floor before reaching the mountain, so you see that here the velocity vectors are invisible as they are in fact points that we cannot see the, little by little, it accelerates when going up on the uphill part of the mountain and in the downhill part, you see that the velocities here are extremely low. This is interesting, it is maybe something you have already experienced, if one day you go to the mountain and that there is a North-wind storm, so a wind from the north, you will have to hide on the side that we call "under the wind", meaning the south side and there, the wind will be much lesser. Why? Because we have a phenomenon here that is this phenomenon of detachment or something what we call a phenomenon of separation. You see that the problem of visualization by vector fields is that in the regions where the velocities are low, we will see absolutely nothing. We have to zoom in to get to see something. When I zoom in here in this region, I see that indeed in this recirculation zone, the flow is recirculating, meaning that it goes towards the right over here but it goes towards the left in the lower direction and hence there is a returning flow in the bottom region. The most important point is that, in comparison with the arrows that are on the outside, the arrows that are in the inside are here extremely small which means that the velocities are extremely low, which is exactly the experiment we can have by ourselves when we will be hiding from the wind behind a small mountain.
