Hello and welcome to this second module of the 5th chapter of the course on fluid mechanics. A fifth chapter that deals with kinematics and in this module we will see 3 concepts that are extremely useful to describe the kinematics of flows.
Namely the pathlines, streaklines and streamlines. I recall that kinematics is the field that studies flows that describes the motions inside fluids without worrying about forces that cause them. Today, we will introduce progressively these 3 concepts, i.e. firstly the notion of pathlines which is linked to the motion of a particle, then the notion of streaklines which already a little more complicated to define, it involves a line that joins the positions of different particles at the same instant then we will finally introduce the notion of streamlines which is a notion perfectly instantaneous.  Let's start by recalling two very special cases, limit cases of what a flow may be.
The first case that we will consider, we will give the definition of what a uniform flow is. A uniform flow is a flow that does not depend on space. I recall that in an Eulerian logic we describe the velocity field by a vector u that depends in a general way of the space x and time. To say that a flow does not depend on space, it means that it does not vary in any of the directions of the space, which means more precisely that none of the components vary in any of the directions of space and that is simply written that the gradient, which is a differential operator, of u is equal to 0. Gradient, you surely all know what the gradient of a scalar is, the gradient of a scaler is the partial derivative of this scaler according to the 3 directions of space, namely x, y, z. The gradient of a vector is what we call a tensor, a matrix in other words,  that contains all the derivatives of all the components of the vector field: ux, uy, uz according to the 3 directions: x, y and z. We will say that a flow is uniform when the gradient of the velocity field is equal to
0, in other words that the velocity field is a constant, i.e. of constant norm and of constant direction everywhere in space.
This is the first quite interesting case, it is the case of the uniform flow. We will also look now at the case of the stationary flow. A stationary flow, is a flow where the velocity field in any points of space does not depend on time, i.e. that for any points of space and for all the components of the velocity field, the partial derivative of the velocity is equal to 0 as a function of time. These concepts will be useful later on in this course. Let's introduce now the notion of pathlines, it is a notion that is Lagrangian, i.e. that the traces of a particle in its motion, it is very close of what we had defined as the Lagrangian approach for the description of fluids. Little reminder, we have defined the Lagrangian approach as following: In the Lagrangian approach, we are interested in u(x, y, z, t)  of a particle in its motion. The particle occupies successive positions
M(x, y, z, t) and the particles is characterized by its position M0, it is tagged by its position M0 in x0, y0, z0 and t0. Now we will follow this particle during its motion. If it is here in the center of the box at the instant 0, a little later, it will have occupied a different place at the moment t1 and then another different position at the moment t2. If now, I join all the successive position of this particle as time passes, I obtain a line that passes by 0 and that is the pathline of the particle that went through M0 at the time t0, a pathline, it is tagged by a point in space and also by a time.
I locate a point in space M0 and a time t0 where the particle passes at this point M0, and now, if I integrate, so if I look at the position of this particle at other moments... Or else in the past, or in the future, I obtain the pathline. Mathematically, this can be defined. Mathematically, what we will be writing is that the pathline is the whole set of positions X of a particle which has passed by X0 at t0 and so 
I simply have to solve the ordinary differential equation that states that the variation of x with time dX/dt, the derivative of x with respect to  time, it here concerns a Lagrangian derivative, I am the particle in its motion, this position X is such that dX/dt is equal to u the velocity field at this point X which depends on time, at the instant t, the field has also the right, in an Eulerian way, to depend on t. The velocity of the particle depends on the position of the particle X which itself depends on time, but it also depends explicitly on time because the velocity field, as we have seen it before, has the right to depend explicitly on time. We give to this ordinary differential equation an initial condition which is that the position of the particle at the time 0 is X0, thus I only have to integrate this differential equation, most often numerically, to obtain a pathline.
There is strictly no problem that the pathlines cross, provided that they cross at different instants, or else this violates principle of causality, meaning that subjected to the same forces, two particles that occupy the same position at the same time must follow the same pathline, principle of causality. However, if the particles pass the same point at different times, there is no reason in the general case why they would occupy the same pathline.
The only case where they will never cross, is the case of a stationary flow, meaning that it does not depend on time.
Another thing, we can perfectly imagine a pathline that loops over itself, this raises no conceptual difficulties, the particle occupies the same position but at two different instants. Now, let's define the streakline. In order to define the streakline which is in fact the whole set of positions occupied at a given instant T by particles that passed a given point M0 at times prior to T. I will try to illustrate this with diagrams. I start by defining 3 pathlines, a pathline of a red particle, a pathline of a yellow particle, and a pathline of a blue particle.If I superimpose these pathlines, I observe that they all pass through a point of space that I call
M0 and I see that the red particle is passing point M0 at the time t0, where the blue particle passes through M0 at the time t1 and the yellow particle passes thorugh M0 at the time t2- I will now be able to collect the position of the particles at the time T that passed through a point M0. M0 is this point here, T I choose it equal to t3 and I collect all the particles at the time t3, that passed through M0. The one that passed through
M0, this is the one that is precisely in M0 at the time t3, is a black particle, it did not have time to move, it is in
M0 at the time t3. Now, I recall that the yellow particle passed through M0 at the time t2, but now it has continued its path and has arrived a little further. I now represent this yellow particle at the instant t3 but it passed through M0 at t2. I do the same thing for the blue particle. The blue particle now at the time t3 is gone widly to the right but remember that at the time t1, it passed through M0. Same thing for the red particle which is very close of leaving the box, the red particle which, at the time t0 passed through M0. I now have collected the particles at the time t3 that have all gone in the past through M0 and I can link these particles (I am not doing it in an arbitrary way), I have really calculated for each infinitesimal variation of time the whole set of positions and this defines the streakline. We see that in a general case, i.e. in a non-stationary flow, i.e. where the pathlines passing through a given point, are not all the same, they depend on the moment when the particle passed through this point, which is the case here, we see that the streakline does not match at all with the pathlines.
In a more simplified manner, we can say that although the pathlines integrate the motion of a fluid in time, so we are following the same particle, we clearly see that the streakline collects different particles at different instants.
The pathline is one particle at different instants, the streakline is different particles at different instants. We will see the next concept that will be the streamline, which is in fact many particles at a given instant. It is interesting to notice here that experimentally we can create streaklines by injecting a dye in a given point and that will create a dye filament that materializes the streakline, it is a very very efficient manner of vizualising flows. Last very useful concept: the streamline. It is a concept this time that is profoundly Eulerian, it is a concept that is associated to the velocity field in a given time. The streamline depends on time. We can only draw an instantaneous streamline. Of course, and it is the case in the flow that I am showing here, if the flow is stationary, if it does not depend on time, then its streamlines do not depend on time either.
How are we going to build the streamlines 
? We will take our velocity field, here represented by small arrows, vector field, and we will look for lines that are tangential in each of their points to the velocity field, we will start these lines in different points of space, we will again give them a tag. An example of streamline, this streamline begins relatively straight. Of course, the flow here is quite parallel, meaning all the velocity vectors are parallel therefore it is a rectilinear motion, then, as we climb over the bump, the streamline tends to go up towards the top, to follow, to fit the shape of the bump. Then we see that in the downstream area, due to inertia, this streamline stays much more parallel and does not follow the shape of the bump.
What must be understood, is that when
I draw this, it is simply a geometrical property of the flow at a given instant. I can repeat this operation and obtain a great number of streamlines, here represented in blue. I can even now erase the velocity field and watch only the streamlines. It is way, which is quite efficient, quite explicit, to describe what is happening in a flow, particularly, if I look at the velocity field in the recirculation zone, i.e. the zone where the velocity vectors are very small, it is quite hard to see visually the direction of arrows and I have to zoom in a lot to see something from it. However, when
I simply look at the streamlines, these can be either open, or closed. When I have a closed streamline, it indicates the notion of recirculation.
There are still many other things that
I can learn by simply watching streamlines, we have defined streamlines as lines that are everywhere tangential to the velocity field, this means that the velocity of a fluid particle, cannot cross a streamline, it is always tangential to this streamline. Thus, I can define the stream-tube between two adjacent streamlines. In this stream-tube, as the velocity is everywhere tangential to these streamlines and that I cannot cross these streamlines, the flow rate is simply conserved, the mass flow rate in general, because nothing is created, nothing is lost in the absence of chemical reactions.
In the absence of chemical reactions I have a mass flow rate that is conserved and what
I see, is that as a consequence, if two streamlines are tightening, and it is the case when we have to climb up the bump, by flow rate conservation, I have to accelerate, and that is perfectly natural.
It is clear that by going above the bump, the flow must accelerate, what we call the Venturi effect simply: I tighten the streamlines so I am accelerating.
Conversely, in the downstream area where we should decelerate, the inertia of the fluid makes this deceleration very difficult and a phenomenon that we call a phenomenon of separation or detachment occurs with the forming of a recirculation zone where the streamlines are closed on themselves.
Generally speaking, a streamline never touches a wall, it is either open, or closed on itself and the only exception, are what we call dividing streamlines, I have represented here the dividing streamline for you. This dividing streamline starts from what we call stagnation points, i.e. points on the wall where the shear is zero. The line that joins these breakpoints are what we call the dividing streamlines. When we look at the flow under this form here, it seems to me that the description of the flow is more explicit than when we simply look at a velocity field. Now, what is the equation of this streamline? It an equation very simple, it is a differential equation that tells me that the whole set of points x of this streamline is such that when
I make a small infinitesimal movement dx along the streamline, I have to stay tangential to the vector u, meaning that the cross product of u and dx must be 0. It is a definition quite abstract but we will see in the module 3 how to specifically apply it. Be careful, streamlines depend on the frame of reference.
I have done here a thought experiment very simple for you, I am imagining that a small cylinder is moving at a constant velocity in a very viscous fluid. These are the streamlines I can observe in the laboratory frame of reference. In the laboratory frame of reference, I see in front of me this cylinder moving and I see the instantaneous streamlines that have this shape. They could perfectly be materialized by pathlines. Now, if I change the frame of reference, i.e. now I am filming the flow at the speed of the moving cylinder, here the flow that I see around me, I am now in the frame of reference of the cylinder, the streamlines absolutely do not have the same shape. It is essential to understand here that streamlines are concepts that are dependent of the frame of reference in which we draw them. In conclusion, we have seen 3 concepts today, we have seen the pathlines, which is a Lagrangian concept, the concept of streaklines that considers different particles at different moments, and the streamlines that consider only one instant of time, so a concept profoundly Eulerian. What must be remembered is that these families of lines that are all very useful to visualize the flow, are equivalent only when the flow is stationary.
