Hello and welcome to this fifth chapter of the course of fluid mechanics. In this fifth chapter that deals with the kinematics i.e. the motion of fluids without worrying about the forces behind it.
We will continue what we have done in module 2, i.e. discussing the differences between pathlines, streamlines, and streaklines. These are 3 very important concepts that will help us describe the movements in the fluids. This time, instead of giving the definitions, we will try to illustrate the differences between these three concepts with two examples, first of all a stationary example, in which the three lines will merge, then a non-stationary example. I recall that these three concepts are often very useful as the pathlines truly describes in a Lagrangian logic the evolution of a particle in its motion, whereas the streakline is a quantity that is quite easily obtained experimentally and finally the streamline is a concept profoundly Eulerian, it is a line that is tangential to the velocity field in a different instant. I also remind that the pathline concerns only one particle where the streakline gathers different particles issued at different instants in a given point. This is a little abstract so let's try to just see it in a very concrete case. This concrete case is here, it is a downward vertical jet that impacts a horizontal flat plane.
The non-permeability condition, imposes that the vertical velocity v is zero in 0 and y here ensures this non-permeability condition.
It is also interesting to observe that this jet is centered on a value x0, and to see that the horizontal velocity that is given here is not equal to 0 in y = 0, this is a violation of the rule of adhesion, that imposes that if the plate has a zero velocity, then the fluid must also have a zero velocity, the two components, or more generally the 3 components of the zero velocity or beyond the plate. Here it is not verified and that is what we call a boundary layer effect, i.e. that the solution we are suggesting here which is a solution of fluid equations, does not satisfy the boundary layer near the wall and will give rise to the forming of a boundary layer. It is not a concept that we can introduce in this introductory course to fluid mechanics. 
This flow, far from the wall, far enough from the wall, will seems as an excellent approximation of the real flow. Let's look here at the velocity field represented by arrows directed in the direction of the velocities and of which the length is proportional to the module of the velocity vector. Here, in the case where the jet is stationary, i.e. it is centered in a position x0 here equal to 0 that does not depend on time. It is possible to compute the equation for streamlines that is the following
: a streamline is defined as being everywhere tangential to the velocity field, which means that the slope of the streamline, or the inverse of the slope dx/dy must be equal to u/v. Recalling the definitions of u and v, and simplifying the hyperbolic tangent that is nothing else but sinh/conh, this expression becomes the following equation, which is a differential equation that must be integrated such as to obtain a family of lines that join the value of y with respect to the value of x. To integrate it, I am seeing very naturally to the right the logarithm of y and to the left, in fact,
-ln(tan(h)), once we integrate first of all the logarithms and that we take from it the exponential, an absolute value appears, which gives in fact a family of streamlines everywhere tangential to the velocity field defined as following, with k being a real number. I have represented here one of these streamlines that goes through a particular point, here, which is the point from which I will be putting later on my streaklines and also the point of which
I will be considering the pathline when at the instant t0, a particle goes by this point. Well, talking about it, what about the pathlines? Let's imagine that at the instant t
= 0 I emit a particle from this, what is going to happen? I am thus representing here the pathline with the positions every
10 time step in small filled circles and the intermediate positions every time step represented by the emptied circles. I thus observe that the particle is first pretty well centered in the heart of the jet, which grants it a negative vertical velocity quite important, then it deviates progressively while slowing down. It seems that in each point this pathline is tangential to the velocity field, this is normal because the flow is stationary.
Now, let's look what is with a streakline, what I will do in this film here, is that at each instant, I will emit a particle from the point considered and observe the evolution of the streakline. You see here that this particle, with particles that are emitted every dt and particles every
10 dt that are the particles in filled circles, we see that this streakline coincides here again with a line that is tangential in all points to the velocity field, and so, to sum up, if I superimpose the three quantities of interest that are the streakline in blue, the pathline in red and the streamline in black, I observe that they all coincide, which is perfectly normal as the flow is stationary. Now, I will get in a more interesting case which is the case of a non-stationary flow. The way
I will make my flow non-stationary is the following:I will simply imagine that my impact point x0 oscillates from left to right according to a sinusoidal movement of period 1/Pi, in other words of pulsation
2. Let's represent now what is the evolution of the velocity field and a particular streamline that does through a particular point which is the that
I mentioned earlier on, situated around here. We will play now the film and see how this jet brushes from left to right the flat plate. Here it gas gone to the right, it comes back to the left, in a perfectly sinusoidal way. The streamline going through the considered point, changes at each instant. If I look at this streamline at the instant here for instance t=1, I observe that it passes through the considered point and then it goes towards the right although at other instants the streamline will be inflected rather to the left. It is important to note here that the fact that the point x0 depends on time does not change the equation of the streamlines as the streamline equations are computed at a given instant
(Eulerian concept) and so time appears as a parameter in this differential equation and this differential equation is not a differential equation dependent on time, the time is simply a parameter that fixes the value of x0. If now I am interested on what happens for a pathline that is emitted from the point considered here at t=0 in a flow that this time is non-stationary. The particle is now released, and let's make a stop in this video, what can I observe here? I observe that the particle which has occupied different positions that are its trace in the past occupies at the time here t=2 for example this position here, at that moment there, the pathline is indeed tangential to the velocity field.
However, at the starting point, the velocity field has now changed and the trace of the pathline that corresponded to the velocity field at the time t=0 is not anymore tangential to the starting point. I resume the film and I observe, the pathline is inflected according to the oscillating motion of the jet. What about the streakline now? In the case of the streakline, I emit different particles at different instants, but from a same point. This time, it is interesting to observe that the streakline is tangential to the streamline at the emission point. This is normal as this particle that just started off in this point is subjected to the velocity field which is the instantaneous field. However, the particle that has arrived here, although it is subjected to the velocity field that is represented in an instantaneous way, is connected along its streakline a neighboring particle that
I represent here that was absolutely not subjected to the same history. There is no reason why the tangent created by the streakline will here be tangential in one way or another to the instantaneous flow.
Indeed, these are two different particles and this is not a velocity vector, these are simply lines that join points for different particles. I resume the film and I will observe something quite characteristic of the streakline, scrolls extremely important with very large deformations and stretchings extremely important of the streakline. 
As I have indicated earlier on, this streakline is never tangential, there is no reason for it to be so in a non-stationary flow to the streamlines goes through its head, although it is tangential to the tail. I recall that in the streakline, the streakline connects particles that were emitted at different instants and that are physically absolutely not linked, these are particles really different, whereas in the pathline, we are following in a Lagrangian manner only one particle, therefore if now I superimpose the three,
I will actually see the differences with a streakline that is tangential in its emission point, a pathline that is tangent in the position of the particle and streamlines that are brushing the space according to the periodicity of the flow.
Conclusion, in a non-stationary flow, there is absolutely no link between the streakline, the pathline and the streamline, and these three quantities are profoundly different. They only merge when the flow is stationary.
