Welcome to chapter n°3 dedicated to the theory of similarity. During last weeks we have approached the physical properties of fluids, essentially the notion of viscosity and surface tension.
During this chapter, we will approach a new aspect known as the theory of similarity. The notion of similarity covers a certain number of aspects that are both relative to physical units of the flow variables but also to notions that will be undoubtedly new to you, the notion of dimensionless number to characterize a flow.
We will see these notion here, through two methods, the first one called Rayleigh's method, and a second method, much more mathematical called the theorem of Vaschy-Buckingham or also called
Pi theorem. We will then see what is the use of these results or more exactly we will see how we use these numbers dimensionless or similarity criteria in engineering application then I will give an example essentially linked to hydraulics.
Before starting, it will be important to clarify to what use is the theory of similarity, by specifying the problematic that is behind. First of all, as usual, we begin with a small warm-up quiz. First question, we suppose that we do a model of a natural flow and that on this model, we measure the velocity of the flow and the question that arises, is to know what is the velocity equal to at the scale 1 knowing that we are capable of measuring the velocity on the reduced model and that the scale ratio between the reduced model and the reality is the factor 1:10.
First possibility is, I suppose, as the geometrical ratio is equal to 10, that I have a factor 10 between the velocity at the scale 1 and the velocity measured on the reduced model. Second possible answer,
I cannot answer this answer as I would need to know much more on the dynamics of the flow. Second question, much easier, and which is relative relative to the notion of fundamental units.
To measure the pressure, we use Pascal, basic question, if I must express the Pascal in the international system of measure, so kg, meters, seconds. What is a Pascal equal to?
First possibility, a Pascal is
1 kg/(m.s). Second possibility, a Pascal is 1 kg.m/s, I let you think at these two questions and we will see at the end of this chapter the answer to these two question.
