During previous module, we have seen the Vaschy-Buckingham theorem that showed us that if we have a physical problem with n variables that describe it we can simply this problem by introducing dimensionless number that are combinations of the initial variables, the initial physical variables. In general if I have n physical variables, I can simply to n - 3 dimensionless parameters that describe my system.
We can considerably reduced the degree of freedom of the system. We will now see practical applications of the Vaschy.
Buckingham theorem through various examples, the first example will be the study of the water flow in a river that we will see again later on as an application of Bernoulli's principle, we will then see a few applications to engineering. I am interested in a river which flows on a slop θ and what I am looking to calculate is the velocity of the water, the mean velocity of the water knowing the height of water. As the driving force of the water flow is gravity,  more precisely what we will be able to show later on is that it will be gravity multiplied by the sinus of the angle. What I am looking to calculate is what is the shape, what is the structure of the equation, how is linked u in terms of h, g and θ in this problem of flow in a uniform and steady state. If I apply my Vaschy-Buckingham theorem, what I see is that
I have a variable here which is dimensionless, so this one here I will not take it into account and so three physical dimensional variables, velocity, depth, gravity. There are two physical units, meters and seconds that appear in these problem variables.
In practice I have 3 dimensional physical variables,
I have 2 fundamental units, I can thus altogether form one dimensionless group. We could apply in details the Vaschy-
Buckingham theorem, here it is clear that the dimensionless number is the Froude number, so, as I have said in the introduction, as the driving force of the water will be g.sinus(θ), I am writing a little differently the Froude number by introducing here sinus(θ) in the denominator. My problem is a problem that will be characterized by only one dimensionless group which is the Froude number so for a given experiment the
Froude number is equal to a constant.
If the Froude number is equal to a constant it means that I must have the velocity that has to vary as sqaure root(g.h.sin(θ)), this results here in fact is known experimentally, it is what we call the Chézy law, so it is a result known since the 18th century. Now we can study the problem in a more complete way by looking at or by asking ourselves the question of the effect of the grain size of the bed. Indeed, a river can be composed of gravel, it can be composed of sand or pebbles, elements with extremely different sizes. How must we do to take into account the roughness of the river bed? The idea is to introduce a scale of roughness ks which is the mean size of the grains that compose the bed. If I had to redo my dimensional analysis, I now have
4 variables that define my problem but I still have only 2 physical units, the meter and the second. The Vaschy-
Buckingham theorem states that I will have two dimensionless numbers that characterize my problem and these two dimensionless numbers are always the Froude number and, if I introduce this parameter here, the easiest way to get a dimensionless number is to divide it by another quantity of the problem which is the water height. The second dimensionless number, is what we will call the relative submersion, so the ratio between the roughness and the water height. There exists an explicit relation between these two functions, the similarity theory states that there exists simply a relation between Pi1 and Pi2, however I do not know the exact value of the parameter f. If reason asymptotically  as I have done it with the drag coefficient and if
I write this equation in a dimensionless form, if I re-write it in a dimensional form,
I am expecting, when the water height will become extremely important to have the ratio ks / h to tend to 0. An idea, would be to say that if it tends to 0, f of something that tends to 0 tends a constant, but I hold this reasoning here, I see that I have a constant and that I end up with a relation that is exactly the Chézy law that we have seen previously. If I do this, unfortunately, I am not able to take into account the effect of the grain size. This reasoning is what we call a complete similarity and here it does enable to end up with a result that is very eloquent from a physical point of view. Another way to do will be to introduce what we call an incomplete similarity.
This means that we will suppose that when the ratio ks / h that I now call
ζ, that when h becomes big, this ratio
ζ tends to 0, that the function f of ζ when
ζ tends to 0 does not tend to a constant but tends towards something that is written here under a asymptotic form, as being
ζ to the power n with here a coefficient of proportionality. If I do this and that
I inject this result here in my law of similarity found previously, I obtain this result here. The theory of similarity does not allow to determine the coefficient n, it is the reason why we speak of incomplete similarity as in fact here now in the structure of my law the coefficient n is not determined entirely by the similarity theory, n must be determine with other considerations, they can be theoretical or experimental.
Experimentally, if we do experiments, we find that n is more or less equal to -1/6, if we do this, we will thus obtain a law which is what we call here the experimental law of Manning-Strickler that we will see again as an application of Bernoulli's principle at the end of this course.
The coefficient that appears here will be the coefficient of Strickler or Manning-Strickler which will be in this case here defined as a function of the roughness at the power -1/6. Now we will approach to conclude this chapter on some application examples in engineering, we have seen at the beginning an example that helped in understanding the problems that were encountered in engineering when we had to do a model that represented what was happening for example here in the case of a river that is overflowing and when we try to calculate the zones that are reached by the overflows, the house or also the impact forces on the buildings. To go from a reduced model to the natural scale or from the natural scale to know how we do to define the reduced model, we need dimensionless numbers or more precisely what we call similarity criteria. We will say that what is happening at the natural scale, at the scale 1 and what is happening at the reduced scale, these two phenomena are in complete similarity if the parameters of similarity are exactly equal between the two experiments. For example if the Froude number here describes what is happening, the Froude number must take the same value at the scale 1 and in the channel. Unfortunately in practice, when we do a reduced model, it is rarely possible to respect all the similarity criteria that define the problem and in general in mechanics we will have many dimensionless numbers that will characterize a problem.
One of the difficulties is that we will have to make choices and that these choices depend on the nature of the considered problem, very often, the Reynolds number is a parameter extremely important in fluid mechanics. In certain cases it will play an very big role in the similarity and in certain cases it will be a parameter that will be negligible, or in any case of a minor importance. For example, we have seen with the calculation of the drag coefficient, we have seen that the drag coefficient, when the Reynolds number became very very big tended towards a constant that was between 0,4 and 0,5, and so here, if
I take a Reynolds number of 10^4 or
10^6 it is not very important. What makes that in this type of experiment, if
I want to work in aerodynamics, if at the natural scale I was at 10^8 and that at the experimental scale I was at 10^5. from the similarity point of view, even though the exact value of the Reynolds number is not identified, the drag coefficient will be asymptotically the same and so we will still have a similarity that will be correct.
In this case, the exact value of the Reynolds number has a minor importance. However, still taking the example that we have seen previously of the drag force, we have seen that when the Reynolds number was very small, for example when we are studying the sedimentation of a particle in a liquid, we have seen that this drag coefficient was inversely proportional to the Reynolds number. Here, if you change slightly the Reynolds number, you will have velocities totally different. In sedimentology, it is important to have a Reynolds number exactly identical between the natural model and the reduced model. Once we have noticed these difficulties, we must find solutions to address them. Sometimes we succeed and sometimes we don't. Amongst the solutions that work more or less, we have what we call the geometrical distortion, which means that we will have geometrical scales, for example for the study of a river we will have height scales or scales of length or width which will be different such that we can verify the similarity on the Froude number and on the Reynolds number, in this case we will speak of geometrical distortion. Sometimes also we can verify only a part of the similarity criteria, so we will talk of incomplete similarity, it is the most often case in the rivers where we can hardly verify the similarity on the Reynolds number and we will in general focus on the Froude number. The problem is in this case here, it is when we will work at the scale relatively reduced we can also introduce a certain number of phenomena, so if for example we study a river at the scale 1 / 100 so on a really small channel, we will have effects of surface tension that can appear on the reduced model and that do not exist on, or that have very little effect on the natural scale. This is an additional difficulty of studies done at the reduced scale in laboratory. In hydraulics, the classical example is hydraulics with free surface where we will simulate in laboratory the flow of a river. This similarity in general is based essentially on the Froude number and we will say that the reduced model is in partial or incomplete similarity with the real model if the Froude number between two scales is strictly identical.
We will write that the Froude number (here raised to the square) between the scale 1 and the scale
2 is strictly identical. It will also require that the Reynolds number is identical between the two scales. In general when we will solve these equations here and knowing the geometrical scale of reduction between the model and the natural phenomenon, we will be able to determine the fluid or the quantities that make the model.
To conclude on this chapter relatively important, also relatively dense even though it uses notions extremely basic on physical units, you must remember many things, the first thing is that the similarity theory is essentially based on notions of homogeneity of the equations and it is an exercice always healthy to check that the equations that we manipulate are homogeneous.  The other result extremely important of this similarity theory is that it helps to turn into a dimensionless form the equations and to simplify them by introducing dimensionless numbers such as the Reynolds number or the Froude number. The simplification of the equations will be thus dealt through different examples in the other parts of the course but it remains a point extremely important in fluid mechanics as most of the time the equations are so complicated that we can solve only a part of the equations so the dimensional analysis is really the key tool to do this simplification. Finally, we have seen it through the example of the pendulum, we have it through the example of the river flow, we can find the structure of the equation without solving any base equation, simply by looking at the dimensions of the variables defining the problem we can often find the structure of the equation, of the variable that interests us and so it is really the most important result of this course here.
