Hello.
My name Yafiza Zorro
I am an architect and Doctor at the Urban Sociology Science Laboratory EPFL
For this occasion, as part of the course on urban mobility
I will present a comparative analysis between three subjects that have become key for analysis and for the development of contemporary global cities.
The first is urban mobility.
Then urban fragmentation.
And the third is the public space.
So it is from this theoretical triad that I will develop this presentation trying to describe each subject, to bring them together and seize their impact on urban areas.
Then, to better visualize the impact on the territory
I will present the results of the study which was applied on the capital city of Colombia.
Bogotá.
This presentation will be structured as follows:
First, I will present the theoretical case that supported this study; then it will be followed by the description of the case study; and I will finalize by the presentation of results of analyzes applied on the ground.
Let's start then by mobility.
As you have already been able to see in previous courses, urban mobility has gained importance in recent years becoming unavoidable by urban studies.
Today, the city is built by a company which has become increasingly mobile and when territories are transformed from mutations driven by mobility.
Therefore arises a first very general question.
What is mobility in the city?
Moreover, in the current context, we are faced with fragmented cities that is to say, a city whose territory exploded, a city that is less and less in unit and which is divided and fragmented.
These fragments lose their cohesion by becoming a source of segregation, inequality and social polarization, that is to say a town subjected to fragmentation events.
In response, the mobility may be profiled as an opportunity to mend the pieces of the city thus make the fragments communicate and create a new social cohesion.
However, if despite this mobility, the city continues to be fragmented isn't it that in some cases, mobility would not strengthen these phenomena of fragmentation?
To address this dynamic marked by mobility and urban fragmentation in the city, we will study them in space where they reveal themselves and materialize best: in the specific area of ​​the city.
Ie in the public space.
But public space is defined not only from a physical construction of the city but also from a social construction.
Ie an urban space that becomes public from experiences and socialization of citizens.
The city we have chosen to observe these dynamics in was the city of Bogotá.
First, because it is in the emerging cities where these fragments are even deeper and more identifiable.
Then, because Bogotá, in the late 1990s and early 2000s experienced a series of urban transformation, both physically and in the social plan which highlighted the three theoretical themes mentioned above.
First to understand why we found that Bogotá is a fragmented city we analyzed its urban evolution.
In the first half of the twentieth century, the growth of Bogotá was a trend towards intensification.
From there, the original intentions and efforts to impose urban planning appeared.
Moreover, Bogotá, at that time, served as urban exploration laboratory where various European and North American urban strategies were exported in its territory.
We can mention here the Austrian city planner Karl Bruner which used the quarters as growth unit.
As the Swiss architect Le Corbusier and the Catalan Jose Luis Sert which outweighed the principles of architecture and modern urbanism bytransforming the growth of the traditional urban fabric from the closed island type to the urban bar.
Here is Bogotá at the end of 1950.
At that time the Colombian government seeking consolidation of Bogotá as the capital city of Colombia, supported the move to annex six small settlements surrounding the city.
Therefore, at this time, the surface of the city has tripled. and signed a defined urban planning strategy.
The type of growth that followed the annexation was urban sprawl, leaving a vast area to fragmentation.
Once this growth by spreading the fabric arrived in the city limits a process of redensification of the territory began these redensification dynamics have led to saturation of networks of various public services in the city.
The lack of coherent planning especially from the 1970s has given way to a strong growth of real estate markets and fleet.
While the management of public transport for example was entirely monopolized by the private sector.
Similarly, the lack of organized public transport system encouraged the use of the car as the preferred mode of travel.
This mismanagement of transport from the city administration, involved not only the entire population but especially the most vulnerable.
Access to the poorest neighborhoods, located mainly in the outskirts was physically very complicated.
Therefore, an access that was very expensive.
Thus Bogota happens in the early 1990s with an urban crisis at all levels: housing, public spaces, etc. but what is watched and shared in the daily life of all citizens through the problem of transport.
Getting around the city of Bogotá at that time had become a nightmare.
To deal with this crisis, the Colombian capital lived a series of physical changes in the first decade of the 2000s.
These changes have been structured by mobility policies.
Indeed, the option taken to meet the challenge of mobility warranty in Bogotá was the establishment of a transport system called 'TransMilenio.'
This system had the initial goal to organize the [inaudible] of local transport. transport policy 'TransMilenio' in addition to offering a new transport infrastructure in the city, has become also an opportunity to provide a new form of public space.
This alliance made between transport and public spaces becomes an attractive urban strategy for production of concrete, quick and visual results.
So two devices characterize the impact of the system TransMilenio on the physical territory of the city.
The first is the creation of exclusive unique tracks for bus of the transmilenio system.
The second device concerns infrastructure projects of public spaces developed around the system needing to access it.
So we are talking about creating stations, footbridges, squares, sidewalks, etc.
To better observe the territorial dynamics of this city we decided to move from a macro scale agglomeration to a more local level.
Today the urban area of ​​Bogotá's intention to decentralization is divided into 19 administrative units called villages.
However, these units continue to depend entirely of the central government.
They are just following policy defined by it.
Most of these policies respond to urban studies that do not exceed the scale of the agglomeration they thus give a more local approach and more effective planning.
For this reason, we decided to apply our analyzes in one of the 19 localities of Bogota: the locality of Suba.
Our choice is based on two conditions.
First, because it is one of the six cities which were annexed in 1956 and for us it was interesting to see the evolution of one of such units.
The second condition relates to the fact that we find in this territory all socioeconomic classes in the city.
This favors the comparison between socioeconomic classes made in our analyzes.
Thus we have defined three groups.
Disadvantaged classes represented here in blue, the middle classes represented in this map, in green, and the upper classes represented here in the map, in red.
To answer our original question: what mobility does to the fragmented city?
We made a series of tests that are grouped and organized in four studies.
The first analysis was to study the movements of the inhabitants of the locality of Suba.
The aim here was to identify the impact of transport modes and particularly that of the transmilenio system.
Then determine access inequality, identify anchor levels at the local territory and agglomeration and determine the level of social diversity in the territory.
On this occasion we used the Bogotá mobility surveys of 2005 and 2011.
The second analysis concerned the observation of displacement spaces.
Note that the intention to develop an infrastructure system of public spaces around the TransMilenio also sought to include the disadvantaged.
However we have not observed a direct impact of the project TransMilenio on this population.
We'll see some examples.
These images correspond to the lower classes of neighborhoods
So we see the lack of public space infrastructure around these displacement spaces.
By cons, here, for the middle class we notice the presence and influence of the treatment of the public space deployed around the TransMilenio system and the appropriation of these spaces by the residents.
In this image of a neighborhood of upper class, we find it prefers direct access to the system.
Therefore, it also favors the public space system deployed by the TransMilenio system.
However we observed during our fieldwork empty spaces, poorly attended, therefore less suitable for its inhabitants.
We can diagnose underutilized infrastructure of this public space.
Another finding of the impact of infrastructure of the TransMilenio as a cut on the urban fabric.
In the case of Suba, although the way of the TransMilenio system is developed on the old main access road to the resort, the dimensions of the TransMilenio's profile added to the conditions necessary to create an exclusive track accentuated the divide already imposed by the old road.
To visualize this, here's an example.
This part of the Suba district is well attended thanks to the presence of these two shopping centers.
At the time the Suba Avenue crossed the middle of these two shopping centers.
However small crosswalks ensured fluidity between the north and south of the district.
With the construction of the track for transmilenio this fluidity has been jeopardized. because the only way road cut all pedestrian crossings.
In addition, the TransMilenio stations have been installed far from the two shopping centers
To access from that point here at the station, the course has been highly extended.
This example is important because not only we highlight the cutting of the fabric locally but we want to emphasize that transport statistics concerning the improvement of travel time takes account of the journey that the vehicle does from the starting station to the end station, but these statistics will not consider the time that the locals use to access the vehicle or stations.
The third analysis is the perception, the lens or the main purpose of this approach was to identify the importance the inhabitants gives the public space.
To do this, we asked people the question: what is public space?
To complete the responses, we wanted to get the opinion on the quality, quantity, safety and responsibility.
To do this, we conducted a survey with three groups of people in Suba.
A fourth analysis was exploration.
The purpose of this exploration was to recognize how the activities or functions of the city and their architectural typology build and give value to public space.
These activities are considered as points of tension or attraction for enabling urban spaces promoting socialization of citizens.
Also, we seek to identify the fragmentation phenomena across the district. produced by forms of typology and types of use of urban spaces.
Our data source was exploratory walks, non-participant observations, photographs, reports and sketches.
Here are summaries of this exploration.
In our exploration we have observed and concluded how the city is built on the basis of a defensive architecture or by the type or by the form or arrangement of the urban built.
To illustrate this, we have identified three typologies in residential areas.
These three types are found in three socioeconomic groups with perhaps a materiality and a few details that make the difference.
For us these typologies, show us the evolution of the construction of an architecture of fear.
An architecture that protects against urban violence.
The first type, the open block, corresponds to the first constructions conducted in the locality.
In this typology, the island is made up of rows of houses or buildings which their facades and their access are exposed directly on the street.
Therefore, the transition zone between the city and the housing was the space of the neighborhood.
So the locals here are invited to live the neighborhood as a space that is both personal and collective generating stronger social dynamics.
Faced with violence, this typology plays a dual role.
For example if the territory is violent, this type exposes the intimate space, ie the private area directly to this violence.
But if this type of home holds business, various uses that make the street a busy place we can identify the areas protected by these activities.
By cons, this natural protection option deal with urban violence disappears in our other two types.
In conclusion, to continue,
I will present the answers to the assumptions we proposed around the issue
What does that mobility to the fragmented city?
Our first hypothesis: public policies aiming to improve the mobility system and public spaces favored the spatial and social fragmentation of the city limiting the accessibility of a significant part of the population to the new mode of transport and to the new public spaces.
We want to emphasize here that the operation TransMilenio was justified by the public authorities as a means of reducing inequalities in the territories promoting accessibility to all citizens.
However, in our analysis of travel, we found that the part of the most fragile population who most need this offer is the one that finally has the most difficulty accessing the system.
Our analyzes of dtravel in Suba confirmed this hypothesis insofar urban policy TransMilenio eventually promoted segregation and thus strengthen territorial fragmentation.
To understand, we must mention that for physical access to the TransMilenio system there are three possibilities:
The first is direct access by stations just by crossing a crosswalk or gateway.
This map of the town of Suba shows the location of the system's stations.
We can see it mostly affects the middle class identified here in green and affluent class identified here in red.
The second option is to access the system through the <i> portals </ i>.
The <i> portals </ i> are major interchanges poles located at the end of each line.
The <i> portals </ i> are the points of departure and arrival of buses.
These are interchanges poles between buses of the main lines and shuttles called <i> alimentadores </ i>.
These shuttles or <i> alimentadores </ i> are the third possibility to access the system.
This is the possibility that brings the most constraints by the multiplication of changes that must be achieved on every trip.
These shuttles belong to the system but do not move on an exclusive way.
The aim of this is to offer alternative access to the system TransMilenio for the people who live far away or work away from these stations and interchanges.
In this map, the red line identifies the course of these shuttles.
We can see that they will serve mainly the least favored population identified here in blue.
According to our movement analysis, only
0.3% of the population of the least favored class of the locality of Suba has direct access to the TransMilenio system.
8% of the population using the system TransMilenio must use the services shuttles to access the system.
This puts these people at a disadvantage to those who have direct access to the system.
So instead of offering better conditions for mobility to those who most need to get out of the enclave of their territory these systems generate for them obstacles with the old transportation system they did not know.
Therefore, our results confirm strong segregation for the less privileged classes compared to the middle class and upper class.
Then, at the time of mapping the movements we see that the lower classes will stay near their place of residence.
On the contrary the middle class spreads over its movements in a representative part of the city.
Finally, the upper class remains anchored to its territory.
This territory is ultimately the best endowed in infrastructure and activities.
This is our second hypothesis.
Mobility systems seeking cohesion across the city can generate two types of fractures locally.
First, the tracks of the new systems of ,obility break the urban fabric creating a spatial fracture and also a social divide.
And secondly when the new mobility system allows easier travel throughout the city, finally staying in local places is becoming less attractive for the individual.
Spatially, local cuts are obvious.
Transport policies, seeking to promote mobility at the citywide are fracturing local territories.
These fractures can be identified from satellite images and the observations made on the ground.
Obviously this kind of transport policy must be accompanied of public space projects that can sew this type of urban fabric.
Such building projects of public spaces should obviously not be limited only to constructing sidewalks or bridges to cross these axes.
No !
The public space also concers the activities and functions which are offered around these spaces.
In this sense, it is necessary to identify where to locate the points of activities strategically seeking reactivation of neighborhood dynamics through functional diversity by favoring short trips.
This is our third hypothesis.
The public space and architecture are fundamental for the development of the shape of the city and the definition of urbanity.
Thus the intervention process involving mobility on the territory are always accompanied by architectural interventions and transformation of the public space which help to consolidate the process of spatial and social cohesion or to weaken it but then are never neutral.
For the people of Suba the perceptions of public space are diverse and opinions expressed sharply divided.
The socioeconomic class the less favored simply assigns a function of place of passage, so transit, while the richer classes give it characteristics such as location sharing, community and freedom.
The middle classes are positioned between these two opinions.
Perhaps this difference is also a reflection of dissatisfaction and inequality that the working classes are feeling.
In this perception of the public space it is impossible not to speak of urban violence.
All socioeconomic strata having mentioned it as the main problem and indeed, the figures on urban violence after a significant drop in Bogotá in the early 2000s then only increased.
Therefore further contributes to encourage a society of fear.
Besides public spaces where residents feel safer continue to be the shopping centers.
So far we wanted to show how mobility issues have a strong influence on the urban dynamic of contemporary cities.
Its relationship with the social and physical issues of the territory.
Mobility has an impact on the formation of territories both physically and socially.
We have seen that the fragmentation of contemporary territory can be processed from solutions of mobility also taking into account its influence on public space which ultimately proves to be the geographical area of ​​mobility.
Thank you. See you later.
