Welcome to this new chapter of the Fluid Mechanics course where we will approach the physical properties and the rheology properties of fluids.
In fact, it is a chapter a bit special, a chapter which will be essentially cultural, as we will essentially see the physical principles, we won’t be going into the mathematical details.
These details, these mathematical developments, will be seen in later chapters.
During this chapter, we will address three crucial points.
First of all, we will discuss the notion of fluid, we will define what a fluid is, what a liquid is, what a gas is.
So we will address here the physical properties of fluids.
The second point will concern the rheological behavior, and more generally the rheology. It is probably a new term for you,
I’ll come back on this definition of what a rheological behavior is. The third point will concern some of the essential physical properties, namely the notion of viscosity and the notion of surface tension.
Surface tension will be the subject of the next chapter, as is it a much broader subject.
We will begin each of the chapters of this fluid mechanics course by a small quiz, not only to test your knowledge, but also to arouse your curiosity.
So, as the first chapter is a cultural chapter, I will ask you a few questions relatively simple, taken from your everyday experience
The first question is to know what a viscous fluid is.
Do you we talk about a viscous fluid when like honey, the fluid sticks to utensils?
Or,
Do we talk about a viscous fluid to describe the ease with which one can spread a fluid, for example this same honey, spreading it over bread?
The second question concerns the notion of temperature.
Imagine we have a thermometer, and that we measure a temperature.
Then this temperature measurement at the macroscopic scale surely corresponds to something at the molecular scale.
But what exactly? 
First possibility:
We are measuring the heat conduction at the molecular scale.
Second possibility:
We are measuring the molecular agitation, thus the agitation velocity of molecules in a certain volume.
I will let you think about these two questions, and will give you the answer at the end of this chapter.
