We now tackle the first module of chapter 1, devoted to the states of matter. 
We will see during this module essentially the three states of matter: gas, solid, and liquid.
For a simple body, it is common to consider three states of matter.
The first state of matter is the solid state, which corresponds to a material at low temperature at the molecular scale, there will be a regular arrangement of atoms or molecules.
The liquid state will correspond to a material at low temperature and at high pressure.
We will begin to have a local disorder, an agitation of the molecules or atoms.
The gaseous state, the third state, corresponds to a material at high temperature and at low pressure.
At the molecular scale, we will notice a large agitation of the molecules or the atoms.
Thanks to the following short film, we will be able to picture what happens at the molecular scale, for that
I have a vibrating table, I have placed a couple of table tennis balls which represent my atoms or my molecules.
When the vibration is relatively low, I have a relatively low thermal agitation:
We can see a crystal lattice of particles and if I try to move one, it stays in the same spot:
We here have a solid response.
If I now increase the agitation velocity of the
particles, so if I increase the vibrations,
We will have an agitation here more pronounced and when I will try to put into motion a particle, we will see that it is much more easier.
We here have something which is representative of the liquid state.
The third state will be observed when we increase the vibration of the table.
In this case, we will increase the thermal agitation and we will have more and more collisions between particles.
The particles will also tend to occupy the entire space that is available. So here, to leave the space of the vibrating table.
We are typically dealing here with something that represents, that conceptualizes, the gas state.
To understand what is going on, we will look at a small numerical simulation. In a small volume, I have molecules interacting by collision. I will look at what is happening when for example
I increase the temperature.
In this case, I increase the number of collisions between particles and between the particles and the wall.
If I now decrease the temperature and approach the absolute zero, that is to say a temperature equal to minus 273 degrees Celsius or 0 Kelvin.
At this point, I have less and less collisions between particles.
The small animation that we’ve just seen will enable us now to define what we call the agitation velocity of particles.
To do so, we will decompose the velocity of the particle into a mean velocity, and a fluctuating velocity. 
So we introduce here the mean, or the mean operator: here between brackets or here with a bar, which is a mean, for example the velocity mean over time.
By definition, the mean, here, of the fluctuating velocity is equal to zero.
What will interest me, it is to compute the square of the instantaneous velocity also called the quadratic velocity. 
To do so, I simply need to take the scalar product of u times itself, that I develop.
I obtain the following relation.
By using this property,
I will be able to simplify this development as here the product of u scalar the mean of the fluctuating velocity is equal to zero.
I end up with the following results:
The mean of the square of the instantaneous velocity is equal to the square of the mean velocity plus the mean of the fluctuation squared.
Here, the mean of the fluctuating velocity is equal to zero. But here, as we squared, the mean fluctuating velocity will be nonzero. 
It will play an important role and for this reason, we give it a name, we will call it agitation velocity, or, typically when the mean velocity is zero therefore when the gas is at rest, we will be speaking directly of mean quadratic velocity.
The second important concept is the notion of pressure, the kinetic theory shows that we can define the pressure as a force per units of area, and we can link it to the agitation velocity of particles, here, raised to the power 2, to the mass of the particles and to the number of molecules.
Here we have a 1/3 coefficient.
What we can show is, that when we have, for example, a wall, we will have particle agitation and so collisions between particles.
These particles will also collide with the wall.
This exchange of momentum, which is unceasing, will create a force per units of area which takes this shape.
I am now going to use a small numerical simulation to illustrate this notion of pressure.
I will consider certain volumes in which I have a certain number of atoms.
I will be able to modify their velocity and their number. For instance, if I increase the number of atoms in this volume,
I increase therefore n, and I will increase the pressure.
Now, the agitation velocity, so the temperature,
I will also increase the pressure.
If now I decrease the volume,
I will increase the number of molecule per units of volume.
There again,
I am increasing the pressure.
This relatively simple simulation highlights how the pressure, which will also be a macroscopic measure, is linked to the molecular scale from the particles’ agitation.
So far, we have done a little bit of kinetic theory to get a conceptual idea, a theoretical idea, of what a gas is at the molecular scale.
Now we will try to establish more factual elements taken from experimental observations.
The first experimental results are due to an Englishman called Robert Boyle in 1662.
What Boyle noticed is that the product between the pressure and the volume is constant.
This result will be obtained independently a few years later by
Edme Mariotte, in 1676.
A couple of years after, Guillaume Amontons redoing the same type of experiments showed that this law pV = constant is only valid if the temperature remains constant. Right before the French revolution, Jacques Charles came by what we call the law of volumes,
This law states that the ratio between pressure and temperature is a unique function of volume.
Joseph Gay-Lussac, during the
First Empire, obtained the law of pressures, which is a variant of the law of volumes and that simply states that the ratio between volume over temperature is a function of pressure.
Finally, we owe to Avogadro the following results, that is the volume of a gas is proportional to the number of particles per unit of volume (i.e. n) and this, for a given temperature and pressure.
If I now try to sum up all these results here.
I obtain the following relation: pV / nT is equal to a constant.
We will see that this constant is the ideal gas constant.
Let’s now resume all these results.
We first pointed out thanks to kinetic theory that at the molecular scale, we could define pressure as the product of the number of molecules or the number of particles per volume, their mass, multiplied by the agitation velocity squared.
A the macroscopic scale, we used the results of experimental observations and obtained that the product between the pressure and the velocity is linked to the temperature, the number of moles, i.e. the number of molecules divided by the
Avogadro constant.
A constant appeared called the ideal gas constant.
We also introduce Boltzmann constant, and we can link the ideal gas constant to Boltzmann’s constant and the Avogadro constant.
We are now able to link the pressure defined at a microscopic scale to the pressure defined at the macroscopic scale.
At the microscopic scale, or molecular scale, kinetic theory has showed that the pressure is linked to the mass of molecules, to their number per unit volume, and to the square of the agitation velocity.
The experimental observations have led to the ideal gas law, that states that the product pressure times volume is equal to the temperature times the ideal gas constant times the number of moles.
If I now equalize both expressions for the pressure, at the macroscopic scale and at the microscopic scale, I obtain the following relation: which after simplification, allows me to compute the agitation velocity as a function of temperature.
This relation marks a link between what is happening at the macroscopic scale and at the microscopic scale. The temperature is a macroscopic quantity, and we see that as we increase the temperature, the agitation velocity at the molecular scale increases.
Inversely, if the temperature decreases, the agitation velocity of the particles decreases at the molecular scale.
To get an idea of the orders of magnitude, we will consider the numerical application,
We are going to take a gas, say nitrogen, whose molar mass is 14 g/mol. 
Normally, this is a so-called atomic gas,
I will here try to treat it as a simple gas.
We are also working at atmospheric pressure and at ambient room temperature, i.e. a temperature of 
20 degree Celsius or
293 Kelvins. The number of atoms per unit of volume in this case is given by the ideal gas law. In this way.
We thus find that n is of the order of magnitude of 10^25 atoms/m^3.
If we now use the previous relation which linked agitation velocity to the temperature, we find that even if the gas is at rest, the agitation velocity of the molecules
is of the order of 720m/s, a velocity that is extremely big.
We will now approach the last point concerning the physical properties of simple bodies, that is the notion of change of state.
For that, I will work in a 3 dimensional space with pressure, volume and temperature.
In this space, liquids will occupy a certain part, gases will occupy another, and solids will also occupy a certain space. We have transition spaces where we can have both solids and liquids, or else here, solids and gas.
So to understand a little better what is happening, we will work at constant temperature and we will see what happens when we change either the pressure or the volume.
This actually amounts to doing a slice, here, by taking a constant temperature.
To give an example of what is happening, I will use once again a numerical simulation. 
So I am working at constant temperature in a space where I have pressure and volume that can vary.
This is typically what can be done for example when I work in a confined space with a piston which allows us to vary the volume and the pressure.
If I am in a volume which is relatively large,
I will be at a relatively low pressure and the space will be occupied by a gas. If I now cross a certain critical phase, I will obtain liquid.
We see that liquid will occupy only a part, the bottom of the piston.
If I increase and I stay in the gaseous part, I have only gas.
I approach the critical part, once I have crossed the critical part, 
I have liquid that appears.
Here, we have a two phase system: gas and liquids.
And if,
I move above my critical curve again,
I only have one system composed of gas.
Here we are at the end of this first module, where we have seen the essential physical properties of gases, we saw on one hand, the kinetic theory of gases that describes at a molecular scale the agitation of particles and linked the pressure to the agitation.
We have also seen at the macroscopic scale the ideal gas law, and when we do the link between the theoretical description of the microscopic scale and the experimental observation at the macroscopic scale, we can link temperature and agitation velocity.
We also revisited, for cultural purposes, the notion of phase change.
During the next module, we will other properties, such as the notion of viscosity.
