Welcome back! In this module we will be presenting a case study of composting.
For this, I would like to welcome
Maqsood Sinha and Iftekhar
Enayetullah from Bangladesh.
They are the founders and directors of the Waste Concern Group.
Waste Concern is a social business enterprise, with a for-profit, and a non-profit section.
And they will be sharing some of their experiences with composting, particularly on a large scale composting project in Bulta at the outskirts of Dhaka. So now, the floor to Maksood and Iftekhar.
Solid waste management is a huge problem in Bangladesh, mainly because of the rapid population growth, as well as also the economic growth in Bangladesh.
In 1991, as per our estimate,
6,500 tons of solid waste were generated per day, and in 2014, based on the study of this concern, we have found that total waste generation is around
24,000 tons per day.
And the volume estimation, by
2020/2025, of the daily waste generation in urban Bangladesh would be around 47,000 tons per day.
Dakha city is divided into two parts, North and South.
4,200 tons of solid waste is a combined total for both the cities.
If we look at the composition of this waste, in Dhaka, around
70% of this waste is organic in nature.
In terms of collection efficiency, the cities are able to collect around 50% of the generated waste per day.
If we look at the solid waste management process in Dhaka, waste is collected from the containers by the municipality, and open dust bins, then transported by the municipal trucks and there is disposed in the landfills.
There, different kinds of problems can happen.
One of the major problems is that the landfills are not designed properly, there is a greenhouse gas emission, mainly methane.
Since the landfills are not properly designed and it's not a sanitary landfill site, there is an issue of ground water pollution and surface water pollution from the (phon).
More land is required because it's end of the pipe solution.
There's an increasing waste management cost, and the way the entire waste is managed in Dhaka, and also in other municipalities of Bangladesh, can cause health hazards.
The project with this concern is implementing in Dhaka and also in other parts of Bangladesh.
It's based on the 3 R approach.
We are promoting segregation of waste.
Segregated waste is collected from the source, then is transported by the trucks, and then taken to a compost plant, where it is recycled through aerobic composting process.
The project we are implementing in Dhaka is the first large scale registered civilian project, where we are claiming carbon credits for recycling of organic waste.
Another project we are doing is reducing greenhouse gas emission by avoiding this from the landfill site.
It is saving the cost and reducing pollution, it is reducing the need for land, creating value from the waste.
And when this organic fertilizer produced from the organic waste of Dhaka city, but it is used in the soil, it can increase the soil fertility.
So this concern's approach is basically trying to solve three problems which are very prevalent in Bangladesh by converting this organic waste into organic fertilizer and then using the organic fertilizer in agriculture soils can not only improve the soil fertility, but at the same time, it can give higher crop yield.
The management model with this concern is the following: to implement a larger scale compost plant based on public/private partnership model, and the second important feature of this project is that the project is also harvesting carbon financing.
The project is implemented through a joint-venture company, between this concern and a Dutch company called World Wide Recycling B.
V. This is a for-profit company, joint venture company, which has invested in the project, and this joint-venture company called WWR Bio Fertilizer
Bangladesh Ltd. is currently operating this facility.
We collect waste free of cost from the different markets of Dhaka city.
The markets are authorized by the city, and we have got a contribution agreement for fifteen years to collect waste from the market.
The revenue model of this concern is based on two revenue streams, one is the sale of compost and the second revenue is the sale of carbon credits. Due to the recent crash in the carbon market, this concern is mainly depending on only one source of revenue which is the sale of compost.
Compost is marketed by a private company, and they market and distribute the compost all over Bangladesh.
There is a stress on the project to sustain the operations with single source of revenue.
First, we have to collect waste from the sources, from the city.
This is one of the largest market of Dhaka city, where we have appointed a private company to collect the waste from these markets.
It generates about 60 to 70 tons of waste, organic waste, every day.
On the right hand side, the picture is of our second facility, and trucks.
For each and every truck, we record the weight on the weighbridge.
This facility, at Bulta composting plant, can recycle 100 to one 130 tons of organic waste every day.
Waste are unloaded in our sorting area, we put it in a composting box which is especially designed, which has a draining system on the base, and we can blow air to insure oxygen in the pile.
Here, compost piles are aerated by forced air from the bottom with large floors, and another aspect of this is that, during the composting process we have to monitor, is the temperature.
As a thermophilic process, we need to maintain the temperature and monitor it.
Quality control is very much important for doing this process.
Normally it takes 40 days for the composting process in the pile, and another 30 days for the maturing phase.
After the time of thermophilic composting phase, the compost is transferred to the maturing shed, where it stays for another
20 to 30 days, depending on the seasons.
Thereafter, it is sealed with a rotating (phon) device, and then the next step is bagging and marketing.
For good quality compost, if you want to market, you must ensure the moisture contempt and to ensure that we use plastic liner to protect the compost from moisture loss, and the design is very attractive to the farmer.
Quality control of composting process is very important, and good quality compost is one of the important aspects for the marketing of this product, and we have to comply with that.
In Bangladesh, according to our
(phon) policy, we cannot market compost without a license, so we need two licenses, one is one license for the compost production facility, and then another license is needed for the product.
The next step is packaging and branding.
I think it is very important for all of us to understand that, if your product is good and packaging is attractive, it will attract the farmer to use it in the soil.
In our previous slides, we have seen large scale composting plants which have more than
100 tons per day capacity.
But these plants are especially designed, which is suitable for small and medium scale towns.
We call it box method of composting.
This technology is patented by
Waste Concern, we have developed this technology in such a way that it is affordable and suitable for other parts of the world.
After a successful experience in
Bangladesh, we started to do partnership with United Nations ESCAP
(Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific) to replicate
Waste Concern's model, which is called Integrated Resource 
Recovery Center or IRRC, in different cities and towns in Ocean Pacific.
At present, we are working in
Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Cambodia,
Pakistan and Indonesia. Apart from this partnerships, we established a recycling training center to offer capacity building training for the municipal's top, officials, mayors and also all the owners from private sectors.
Out of many lessons, we have compiled a few lessons, key lessons which we want to share with you.
First, for any recycling project, there is a question of incentives and subsidies. Compost product cannot compete with chemical fertilizers.
Whereas in most of the country chemical fertilizer is heavily subsidized, while the compost, as an organic product, it is not subsidized.
So, there should be some thinking on this aspect with the government.
And then, the clear policy (phon) on private/public partnership.
We also experienced that small towns and cities cannot afford this kind of recycling projects with their own source of funds, so if you want to attract private investment in this kind of projects, we have to give comfort to the private sector.
One of the opportunities for the recycling project is that we can claim carbon trading, although the market is low today.
What we hope for the future is better market of carbon trading.
Compost, and it's very important if we want to promote compost from organic waste, the farmer must have trust, they must have good quality compost which can be used in the soil.
There's no compromise about the standards of the compost.
And then, quality control is very important.
So, during the process of composting, we must maintain the quality of the process, and the product quality.
And as we're dealing with this, source separation is very important.
In most of the cities and towns source separation is starting to exist, so, it's very important for source operation to make people aware, and there must be some policy in every city.
A compost testing protocol is very important.
Without this testing protocol you cannot insure the quality of compost.
That must be standardized by the government.
A specialized marketing company is very important, as right now, we are harnessing large fertilizer company, marketing company, for selling our product.
They have a network all over the country, experienced people and storage facilities in regional towns and cities.
And then inclusion of informal sector.
This is very important; sometimes, we make policy without thinking about these people. In our Waste
Concern (phon) factory, we try to include, train these informal, poor women and men, we train them and give them better working conditions and health situation.
Hello! Thank you very much for your patience to listen to us,
I'm Maqsood Sinha.
Thank you very much for listening to our presentation.
Thank you very much.
Goodbye.
Goodbye.
