Welcome back to this last session of the second block.
In it I would like to talk about the role of the information and communication technologies:
How these technologies affect the management of the urban infrastructure systems.
I am sure you have heard by now about smart cities, smart transport, smart water, smart energy.
And this is clearly the result of the growing role,
I would say, in the last 10 to 15 years, in managing urban infrastructure systems.
I will talk about three roles basically, three functions that the ICT plays.
They play a role in efficiency gains, in empowered customer relationships, role of the customer, and in terms of the new services that the ICTs allow.
Now, let's talk about efficiency gains first.
Now, basically, efficiency gains and the role of the ICTs is about information.
Managers of urban infrastructure systems use information to manage these infrastructures.
And, thanks to the ICTs, they have more information available.
That is the basic principle.
And where does this information come from?
Thanks to the ICTs, it comes from sensors, from RFID chips put into all kinds of things, from cameras, and of course from the data that are so provided and then managed in order to make better decisions.
So, basically, what do the ICTs do?
They duplicate or mirror, as I call it, they mirror the physical infrastructure by way of a data infrastructure, or data layer, if you want, and then the managers of urban infrastructure systems can take better decisions to operate their infrastructures, to maintain their infrastructures, and even to plan their infrastructures.
Let me just give one example.
You all know that the water pipes, the drinking water pipes, or the sewage pipes under the ground, they have leakages.
We have huge leakages, but thanks to sensors we can now locate these leakages much more precisely and so we can intervene much more rapidly in a much more targeted way, not to create-- or create at least less disturbances in the streets when we dig up the streets.
And by that, the whole system can be managed in a much more efficient way than previously.
This is the first role of the Information 
Communication Technologies.
The second role is about the customer.
So, we have now seen there is a data layer coming on top of the infrastructure layer or the infrastructure services layer.
And the customers, they can take advantage--
It is not only the managers that can use this infromation to improve the services, it is the customers that can use this data to better use the infrastructure, to better take advantage of the urban infrastructure.
For example, by having real time information about transport, where are the congestions?
All these kind of things.
Let's talk about the third function is the new services that are being made possible thanks to this data layer.
Again those are services that are ultimately going to be useful to the customers.
And these data, not only can the customers use them, as we saw before, in the case of real time information about congestion, but they can use this information for all kinds of new services.
Think in this case, for example, about car or bike sharing, where you know exactly where things are available, the next bike is available, the next car is available, and there are companies now that can offer car and bike sharing services thanks to the data layer that has been created.
So, basically we have these three things, and we will talk in more detail about this later at very concrete examples.
Let me conclude this second block.
It has been quite a long block with quite a lot of information.
And we have given you--
First I think we have really talked about what managers do in urban infrastructure systems.
They operate the systems, they maintain the systems, they plan for future systems.
Then we have talked about the stakeholders.
Urban infrastructure management is not just about activities, it's also about operations.
It is also about managing the different stakeholders that are involved.
We have talked about the citizens, the customers, the operators, the investors, and the different political authorities that are all involved.
And, again, the managers have a big role to play in dealing with these stakeholders.
The third session was about the different dimensions.
We have talked about the technical dimensions of managing infrastructures, think of interoperability, we have talked about the economic dimensions of managing urban infrastructures, a lot of economic considerations here about the social dimensions, the environmental dimensions, and, of course, the jurisdictional dimensions and challenges these dimensions pose to the urban infrastructure managers.
In the fourth session we have talked about the different schools of thought.
And, basically, we showed you that there is a public management school of thought, including new public management, and then a market-based school of thought, where the public-private partnerships is now the prevalent model.
And just before I have talked to you about the three different roles the ICTs are now increasingly playing in managing urban infrastructure systems.
In the next two blocks, we will now go into detail and first talk about energy and then talk about transportation.
And, here again, we will see much more concretely how all these things play out: the management functions, the stakeholder functions, and, of course, the role of the information communication technologies.
Stay tuned.
