Welcome back to the course.
I have the pleasure of receiving Christoph Rothballer, he's an expert principal at
Boston Consulting Group.
He's extremely knowledgeable about questions of infrastructures and public private partnerships.
Among many other things, he has led and recently completed the
World Economic Forum's
Strategic Infrastructure Initiative.
Christoph, everybody talks about the global infrastructure investment gap, but how serious is that really?
I personally think it's really one of the big global issues and that view, I think, is also shared by many of the global institutions from the World
Bank all the way to the G20.
And in fact we, within BCG, we've done our own analysis and estimated the annual investment gap to be about one trillion
US dollars each year.
It's quite a massive gap.
One of the reasons behind that gap - on the one hand you have, in developed countries, an infrastructure stock that's aging rapidly.
For example, in my own country, Germany, a third of the rail bridge is a more than a hundred years old.
And on the other hand, you have, in the developing countries, massive infrastructure needs, just because of soaring population numbers, also because of urbanization and industrialization.
That's really driving the infrastructure needs there.
And, on the other side, the supply of infrastructure is quite constraining because of limited government budgets and also some hesitance among the private sector to invest in infrastructure.
There are also a couple of other structural reasons such as low construction productivity or some of the issues in the early permitting phases, land acquisition phases of infrastructure, all this constrains the supply quite a bit as well.
And these infrastructure limitations also have quite some repercussions in social and economic dimensions.
On the one hand, they're very immediate things such as all the congestion that we're seeing in ports, in the airports, that a lot of people are suffering from.
But then, that also has an impact on economic productivity.
For example, for Africa, it's been estimated that, if they would solve the infrastructure gap, annual growth in GDP terms could be two percentage points higher per year, so that could make quite an impressive impact.
But even on a social dimension, infrastructure really makes a difference, for example, there are studies out there how infrastructure increases, the number of students that read at home at night because of electricity at home or how paved roads increase girls'school attendance. All these studies are there, so I clearly think it's a big issue and it could make a huge impact to the world if that would be solved.
So how then can public-private partnerships help address this challenge?
Think PPPs can address a challenge in various ways.
The first thing is: PPPs can save costs and that's because PPPS bundle really various activities across the life
The first thing is: PPPs can save costs and that's because PPPS bundle really various activities across the life cycle from construction, design, operations and maintenance into one contract and really incentivize the contractor to optimize whole life cycle costs.
It means that the contractor has to design and built the asset in a way that it can be operated easily and also maintained easily over the whole life cycle.
And that will really save money.
Secondly, the government transfers certain risks through the PPP to the private sector, and these are typically the risks that a private sector can very well manage and control; for example the risk of a construction cost overruns, something that the private sector can manage very well and by this risk transfer, government can save money as it's not on their balance sheet anymore.
Thirdly, I think PPPs also are a good opportunity to introduce additional innovation into infrastructure delivery.
And that can happen in two aspects.
The one is really on the commercial side, so just imagine them the many airports that out there that have really innovated a lot on the ancillary business side, some of their best in class airport nowadays do 50 % or more of their revenues from such businesses as advertising, retail, hotels on site.
And that really reduces the infrastructure funding burden on the government.
Secondly, there's also technical innovation.
For example, in the UK there's a good example how a PPP contractor applied asphalt preservation surface coating and therefore increased, as said, lifetime by one third.
Again a clear impact and that's directly incentivized through the long term contracts of a PPP.
And not only that, PPP is also typically faster in delivering a project, there's good evidence that the construction happens faster because a private sector wants to earn money with those assets so they construct faster. faster because a private sector wants to earn money with those assets so they construct faster.
And secondly, you can avoid some of the pay-as-you-go financing that we often see in the public sector, that you build five kilometers of road then you wait until more money is there, you build the next five kilometers because a private sector can tap into additional financing resources, particularly those from institutional investors, and get all the construction done in one go.
All these macroeconomic benefits of infrastructure typically occur faster with PPPs.
And lastly, in some settings,
PPPs can also help to filter out certain projects that are not really viable because you have this type of double due diligence, first by the public sector, then by the private sector, then by the banks that are financing the private sector concessionaire so you really get rid of those white elephant projects that we sometimes see in traditional project delivery.
And through all those mechanisms together PPPs can make quite an impact in terms of costs and in value for infrastructure delivery.
So, it's the governments that initiate the PPPs, what do they need to do in order to get the PPPs to work?
Obviously PPPs are not an easy undertaking, so there's quite some things that governments need to get right and that really stretches across the life cycle from project inception to project preparation all the way into implementation.
Let's start from the beginning.
I think the first thing they need to get right is select the right project for a PPP.
Because not every project is conducive to PPP delivery, so they first need to select projects that make sense from an economic environmental and social point of view.
And secondly they need to make sure or assess that the PPP delivery really adds value or saves costs for the government.
And once they've chosen the right project, they need to prepare it properly for that type of PPP transaction.
There are many elements within that project preparation phase.
That starts with the sound and rigorous demands study.
We've seen so many demand studies with inflated traffic forecasts, particularly in the roads sector
30-40 %, more than it turned out to be.
You need to get a regressing clear approach to land acquisition and permits, to have all the prerequisites, the legal prerequisites for the private sector to proceed with the project.
And you also need to get things right around stakeholder engagement.
Then, in the next phase, you need to write the right contract and that is the most important element, and there is really a risk allocation.
Their governments have to follow obviously the fundamental principle within PPPs of allocating risks to the contractual party that is best able to manage those.
And in many cases, risk sharing is the right way to go about.
And then, once this contract is finalized - obviously, they have to organize a very transparent and unbiased procurement process and also stay involved because PPPs are a partnership over a long time horizon so it's not a one-off transactions, the public sector really needs to stay involved over a long time, support the private sector and also monitor the private sector and how they execute construction and the operations and later on.
So, there are a lot of things I need to do across the life cycle.
So PPPs are a partnership, there are governments and there's the private sector, you talked about the governments.
What are the challenges for the private sector? the private sector, you talked about the governments.
What are the challenges for the private sector?
For a private sector, it is also quite a challenging thing such a PPP, if you compare it to traditional contracting.
First, the new capabilities that are required from the private sector, because it's not only the design in the construction piece but all of the sudden construction companies have to operate and maintain an asset for a very long time.
Often they might not have these skills in house so they need to form partnerships themselves or consortia with operating companies, also with financiers, to do all this.
And orchestrating that consortium can be a difficult task.
Secondly, it's really because the risks are transferred to the private sector.
The private sector has to become really sophisticated about assessing, evaluating and managing these risks.
And there is a multitude of them, it could be the traffic going up and down, it could be macroeconomic conditions that change, so really, having a plan for risk management is very essential.
Thirdly, it's really the financing piece that comes on top for the private sector because the public sector kind of shifts those assets off the balance sheet, the private sector needs to finance them.
And in times of Basel III regulation, where a project financed by banks is more difficult, this can also be a challenge and developing the type of skills you need to structure an efficient financing, developing the relationships with the banks, developing relationships with institutional investors or even setting up funds by their own, to bring in third party money into those assets, this is some of the additional challenges that the private sector is facing. And last but not least, obviously, it's a long term partnership as we've mentioned before.
And that leaves the private sector exposed to the long political cycle over thirty years, and we all know governments change every four to five years, and that leaves them with quite some risk in terms of political and regulatory risk which is obviously something that's not easy to manage for private sector firm.
Over time we have heard about some negative examples of PPPS, what are the disadvantages?
Yes, no, I fully agree, they are clearly.
.. PPPs are not felt safe and there are examples of not successful PPPs.
For example, in Bolivia, a concession was terminated because of stakeholder opposition; in
Spain, we've seen quite a few road concessions being bankrupted after travel or traffic went down.
And there are many reasons behind that.
But, really, the disadvantages of PPP come in different shades.
First, the public sector kind of loses control over an asset and that is particularly a problem in a very dynamic urban environment sometimes where things are happening fast and you put out the concession for thirty years and then you lose kind of the margin to maneuver as a public sector.
Secondly, also, PPPs have higher transaction costs because of their complexity, they are more complex to structure and that results in costs. Typically, for
PPP, you need to have a minimum threshold of investment so that it actually makes sense.
And thirdly, PPPs are over 30 years and there's one contract which is written today, so they essentially incomplete those contracts, they cannot account for every circumstance that might arise in the future.
There will always be some disputes and many of those disputes can be very costly, you have these renegotiations and the likelihood for such renegotiations is relatively high and that can be quite expensive in the end.
And then, lastly, also the private sector might have higher cost of financing themselves than the public sector has, so, really, the PPP needs to have sufficient efficiency gains to offset this disadvantage.
And taking this all together, obviously, PPP, in some cases, it might make sense, in others, not.
So, for each case, you need to have a rigorous analysis of the advantages versus the disadvantages and then come to a conclusion whether it makes sense.
So Christoph, we have talked in the beginning about the global infrastructure investment gap but, you, personally, what do you think the future of PPP is?
PPPs came up in the UK in the 90s, then they spread around the world, many emerging countries are now adopting
PPPs as well. I think that the global adaptation will certainly go up, and there are many PPP programs being set up in countries from Colombia, even in Paraguay, Philippines, lot of countries are pursuing that and are convinced that it will have some benefits. But I think there's also an element of learning that we need to embed into
PPPs because, we discussed before, some PPPs have failed. And I think there are nicely established best practices how you're supposed to do PPPs but they're not always supplied and in practice.
But again, the many initiatives on the way to get that done, for example, the World Bank has a PPP certification program for managers that they are instituting right now.
And governments are doing a lot, they are setting up PPP units to spread these capabilities more broadly within the public sector to structure PPPs.
Also, many governments have revamped their previous PPP programs, for example, UK with PF2 or
Colombia with their 4G program.
I think there's a learning process that needs to be done and,
I believe, through that learning process some of the benefits of PPPs could come out even clearer.
But I also have to say I think the infrastructure gap is not going to be closed by PPPs alone.
There's a lot of other things that governments need to get right and that starts with really prioritizing the right projects, also having the government money either through taxation or user charging to pay for infrastructure.
Also, an optimization of the operations and maintenance of government owned assets is something they need to do.
Another thing, becoming smarter or more digitally apt in infrastructure is another key way forward.
So, I think PPPs is not the one route to go, there are many other things you need to do as a government.
But I would say, in that portfolio of opportunities, PPPs will make a contribution, and if we learn to make them even better, it could be a lasting contribution.
Great. Thanks, Christoph, so much for your insights!
Thanks for having me here.
