We will now address space through two transversal approaches: nature and time.
In the first case, we often mentally superpose an environment that has inhabited spaces above, and another environment beneath: nature.
What if nature was nothing but a component of society?
Furthermore, many people, including scholars, have believed, or still do, that pre-human realities like atoms, cells, planets or living species could be sufficient cognitive resources to explain human behavior.
It can be first argued, conversely, that human history has its own rationales.
It can be contended, too, that there are different natures, that none of them is reducible to the logics of physical and biological worlds.
Warning: nature is not the opposite of culture, but a part of it.
Let's try to go beyond this paradox.
The relationships between societies and natural environments have long been a substantial component of geography, to the point that geographical determinism meant natural determinism throughout the 20th century and in many different languages.
Today, things have changed and nature has become just one particular topic among others for geographical research, as it is in the other social sciences, such as the economy of natural resources in economics, or the politics of nature in political science.
This new situation gives the social sciences of space the freedom, and responsibility, to propose fresh insights into relationships between inhabited spaces and natural environments.
In this session, the general societal issues of these relationships will be examined, in addition to their spatial dimensions.
What is nature? And how far can nature be a part of the exploration of inhabited space?
This is the question we will be examining in the course.
Let's try to get a simple and clear view of this subject.
First of all, there is a reality, the physical universe, which is studied by the science of matter, or physics.
Because of the emergence of living organisms and their logics on planet Earth there has been a distinct field of research to explore the sciences of life, or biology.
The objects of these studies are, through their construction, independent of social life.
They existed before humans appeared and would continue to exist even if every human disappeared.
These realities are called bio-physical worlds.
Now, if we look at societies, we see that they had high mountains, which, during millennia, were strongly repulsive realities, even if they are now very attractive, as well as being economically significant for skiing, trekking, and climbing.
The soil of the western United States has long been unsuitable for agriculture until knowledge of dry-farming was developed.
This was also true for part of the arid
Champagne region of France, which was incapable of producing high yields and was called ‘hampagne pouilleuse’ or ‘seedy Champagne’, until new farming techniques made of it one of the most efficient cereal crop-producing zones in Western Europe.
Biophysical worlds have their own chronology, and nature has a history, which is human history.
Nature can then be defined as biophysical realities, insofar as they concern societies.
In other words, it could be said that nature is a social dimension of biophysical realities.
Therefore, nature should not be opposed to culture.
Nature is a part of human culture.
Here, the notion of a three-fold system, including actors, objects, and environments, could be useful.
Nature can be considered as an environment but not the environment.
There are unnatural environments, like social milieus.
Inhabited spaces are environments.
As for nature, it shouldn't be forgotten that there are two major natural environments; the body, and the external natural environment.
These two envelopes are certainly environments, and pre-figure the actors they encompass, but can be modified by the actors' intentionality.
This is obviously true for the body.
Our body kills us, at the end of the day, that is our lifetime, but the psychosomatic impact of our mind over our body is massive and indisputable.
Volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and tsunamis can kill hundreds of thousands of people.
What has been called the ‘Anthropocene’ is a geological era defined by the significant impact of human agency upon Earth's biophysical worlds.
The recent and progressive accumulation of power by societies gives human actions the same level of influence as physical or biological forces, imposing on humanity a brand new series of responsibilities.
