Hydrometereological Forecast Models
A Resilient Future: Science and Technology for Disaster Risk Reduction
In this video I will try to tell you about the role of numerical forecast models for risk management of hydrometeorological hazards.
After a brief introduction, we will start by looking at weather forecast modeling.
In particular, we will look at the performance of weather forecasting models, and we will try to tell you that they serve as a basis for all other hydrometeorological hazard models.
We would like you to understand that the weather forecast is at the basis for other hydrometereological model assessments of risks.
So we will start by looking at weather models in more detail.
You can easily imagine that, for example, for a hurricane, it's very important to know the exact path of a hurricane to know where it hits land and to know how strong it is when it hits land.
In the example on the slide you see the path of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 that hit the United States very severely.
You can see that now the path of this hurricane is very well-determined and also the strength is given by the color of those dots.
But it took the forecast models a great deal of effort to get to this final result, and we will look at that later on some slides.
For those who watch the weather channel regularly, they may have realized that recently weather forecasting has become much more accurate.
In fact, over the last fifty years the increase in skill in weather forecasting has improved steadily and also dramatically.
In addition to that, not only do we get better scores for the weather forecasting, but also there have been new techniques introduced that allow the quantification of uncertainty.
Quantification of uncertainty is particularly important for hazard and risk management, hazard forecasting and risk management.
Talking about the accuracy of weather forecasting, it is important to realize that it depends critically on the amount of observations that are available.
In the early times of weather forecasting there were really only surface observations, so, a weather station that measures air temperature, humidity and wind speed, for example, and a very few balloon soundings that give you upper air information.
With time, the situation has improved dramatically.
Now we not only have surface observation and much more balloon soundings, but we also have been able to incorporate the information from remote sensing into the course of weather forecasting model runs.
In particular, satellite observations, but also the Wren radar has contributed to improve weather forecasting quite dramatically.
An important new technique that has been introduced to weather forecasting is the use of <i>ensemble forecasts</i>.
What are ensemble forecasts?
Ensemble forecasts are obtained by running the same numerical model but with slightly different initial conditions.
So you take as an initial condition the observed weather and you disturb it a little bit, just put a little noise on the initial conditions.
And that leads to the fact that you get different model runs.
This emulates a little bit the situation that the real atmosphere is doing.
Simply because, with the observations you have on the current weather you cannot capture the full variability in space that is present, this artificial disturbance that you impose on the initialization of a weather model will help to see what the model is trying to do with these initial conditions: whether it's actually a stable development, regardless of how you disturbed the initial conditions you will always, maybe, end up with the same forecast, or, on the opposite, a little bit of disturbance in the initial conditions may lead to a largely differing forecast in the weather in a few days, which is, unfortunately, the more common case in the atmosphere because it's a highly non-linear system.
On the slides here you can actually see two examples of this.
Very importantly, as we looked already at the tracks of Katrina, when Katrina was not yet a hurricane but simply a tropical storm on August 24th of 2005, these ensemble forecasts gave very, very different tracks.
So for the emergency troops on land that had to prepare for that tropical storm, it is very difficult, if the forecast is as varied as it is here, to take appropriate measures.
You don't want to evacuate people from such a large portion of land.
And therefore it's very useful to see that as we get closer to the actual event of landfall...
So on August 27th, all these ensemble runs, they show now a much clearer picture of the potential hurricane track, and also the strength of the hurricane can be forecast with much more accuracy.
So, in summary, we can say that there's three factors that have improved our basis for hydrometereological forecasting: one is the use of more observations, the experts call that <i>data assimilation</i>, then one is, of course, also, and I have not talked about that in detail, that we have better process representations in the models themselves, so the models became better, and, because of increased computer power, we are now able to run them at a higher numerical resolution.
A hydrological forecasting system that comes out of our own group is called <i>Alpine3D</i>.
It has a focus on the hydrological cycle and is particularly suited for situations in alpine terrain and therefore also for snow.
What you can see here on the slide is that we can work with a variety of input parameters, input that comes from automatic weather stations or from other larger-scale weather models, or even from remote-sensing data, and they can all be used as input into this modeling system that has, in itself, small-scale flow and metereological simulations, it has a complex terrain energy balance module, and treats drifting and blowing snow.
The core of it, however, is this part down here that we would call a <i>vegetation, snow and soil module</i>, which deals with water and snow dynamics close to the surface.
This is a distributed model that then feeds into a conceptual run-off model.
The conceptual run-off model has the task to predict how the dynamics at the surface actually translates into the water that flows into the rivers.
This is what you're ultimately interested in when talking about a hydrological model forecast.
So, in summary, what you get from the model is a variety of parameters.
And this particular model is physics-based, so it tries to represent all processes with predefined parameters, as opposed to what we're going to look at next that is a more conceptual model that has a lot of tunable parameters.
A hydrological model system that is used in operational flood forecasting is the system <i>Prevah</i>.
The slide shows you a summary of the Prevah layout and the associated parameters.
You can see on the left all these boxes, they represent sort of linear reservoirs.
So water flows in, or snow comes in, and then there is... based on the level of water, it will be handed on to the next level.
This is the basic principle behind linear, reservoir-based hydrological modeling.
So the Prevah system was implemented and, together with the weather forecasting, produced the following result.
We see two parts of panels here: the upper one and the lower one.
The forecasting happens with three lead times: one day, two days, and three days.
And for each of these lead times you will get a different result.
And, of course, since the model is run at least once a day, you will get, again, the section that has been forecasted, for example, for 'lead time two days' the day before will become, on the next day, the 'lead time one".
So this is why the curves that we see here are a little bit discontinuous as we go from one to the next day.
So let's look at it in a little bit more detail.
Now, first of all, the easy curve is the black one.
The black one is the observed run-off for the river Sihl.
And the colored curves give you the forecast model result for these different lead times that we just talked about.
And the lead time one is the blue curve; the lead time two is the red curve; and the lead time three is the green curve.
As you can see, for example, here is that the red curve will do a jump here, on the transition between these two days.
That means that for this day the lead time one would end up with the run-off forecast that has about a hundred at that scale; and then jump back to a lower value as the simulation is repeated on the next day.
This is how these curves are interpreted.
We don't have to look in full detail at all these curves.
But the important part is that most of these deterministic forecasts, were too low, and would not forecast the actual peaks in run-off as shown by these two peaks here.
Except for, the second peak was actually quite well forecasted, but only with a lead time one, so one day before, as expressed by the blue curve here.
So you can see that the model failed to reproduce the first run-off peak, and it had some skill in predicting the second run-off peak.
In summary, looking at the slide, what we can say is that when you also re-run the model then with the observed precipitation input, and that's the brown curve we have not talked about so far, then there is a very good performance of the model in reconstructing the total run-off curve.
That means that the failure of the model system in predicting the run-off peaks was purely because of insufficient precipitation forecasting in the metereological part of the system.
You can show this because when you use observed precipitation then the model does actually quite a convincing job in predicting the actual run-off curve.
On the upper panel of the graph what you can see here is the results from ensemble forecasts.
What you see is that the interquartile range of the ensemble forecasts does not get those two peaks, as we have already discussed, for the deterministic runs.
But you can also see that the extreme cases of the ensemble runs do capture the event in its full magnitude.
So the ensemble forecast is useful also in a case where the model in general has not a perfect performance because it shows you what is possible.
I hope this video has convinced you that numerical models are indispensable tools of risk management for natural hazards.
