Geographic Information Systems
A Resilient Future:
Science and Technology for Disaster Risk Reduction
This lecture covers the most fundamental aspects of geographic information systems and actually provides a sort of very short summary of another of our online courses called an Introduction to Geographic Information Systems, which is for the time being only available in French.
We would like to recommend you to refer to this online course, if at some point you would like to dig further into these matters.
I will present the two first parts of the lecture on the digitazation of the geographical space and the storage of the obtained geographical information, whereas my colleague,
Stephane, will then continue with the use of geographical information in spatial analysis and visualization.
The digitization of the geographical space can be seen as a contolled reduction and simplification process that turns a complex three-dimensional reality into a flat, north-oriented representation.
This is basically a map only showing a limited set of selected features, such as the ski lifts in this example.
This means that this process depends very much on the thematic content of the expected result since the features and processes to be accounted for need to be chosen adequately.
The words "features" and "processes" drive us very naturally to the two main elements of geographical information: on one side, the crisp, homogeneous features with a well-defined geometry, such as points, lines or polygons, which define actually the vector or object world, and, on the other side, processes or phenomena with values that are continuously changing over space and are therefore best described by grids and values which define the raster or image world.
In both cases--vector and raster data-- we need to link the descriptive information to a position in space either in the form of the coordinates of the vertices of a geometry or the coordinates of the cells forming the grid.
These coordinates are defined within a projection system that describes the mathematical transformation of the three spherical coordinates
(latitude, longitude and distance to the center of Earth) to the two coordinates, easting and northing, of the two-dimensional space.
Unfortunately the rules of geometry show that this transformation cannot be achieved without loss of information.
Any given projection system will only preserve simultaneously directions, areas and distances in a narrow,
6 degree-wide band.
This is why each country has its own or several own projection systems.
And in turn this explains why GIS software need to be able to handle all kinds of projection systems and convert coordinates from one system to another.
The aquisition of position data is fundamentally based on traditional land surveying techniques nowadays complemented by the use of global positioning systems.
The aquisition of thematic data can be achieved by direct measurements or by all kinds of airborne techniques ranging from remote sensing to drone surveys.
The provided images may need geo-referencing to fit them at the right place and are often used as a support to digitize the vectorial objects of interest.
Numerical information on objects or phenomena linked to spatial position need to be stored in computer files from which the information will then be retrieved later on.
Geographical information may be stored in simple, sometimes semistructured, files with a broad range of file formats both in the vector and in the raster world.
The most commonly used vector file format is probably the set of files of the shapefile system with the <i>.shp</i> files storing the spatial information, the <i>.dbf</i> storing the thematic information and the shape index <i>.shx</i> file.
In the raster world the most widespread format is probably the <i>.tiff</i> image format, either with its spatial positioning information embedded in the header of the file
(the so-called <i>GeoTIFF</i> format) or stored in a separate file, the world file.
As compared to simple files, a database has the advantage of providing a data management system that includes powerful tools to facilitate manipulation and querying of the data set.
Databases are also supported by software engineering tools used to design and implement the sometimes complex data structures.
Finally, their major interest is perhaps to be well suited to deliver data services in a client-server architecture when simultaneous and concurrent addition processes need to be handled.
This is it, and I will now give the floor to my colleague Stephane.
The first part of this lecture allows to describe the properties of phenomena occurring on the surface of the Earth,
The spatial distribution of these phenomena can be either discrete or continuous and this distinction structures spatial analysis into fields.
The first one is about object models used to represent and analyze discrete spatial distributions.
And the second one is about the modeling of continuous surfaces used to represent phenomena defined at any position in space, such as altitude or temperature.
Discrete geographic variables are used to represent discrete spatial phenomena.
This is the case when the distribution of the thematic properties of a given phenomenon are discontinuous in the geographic space.
The three types of spatial entities that can represent discontinuous phenomena are points, lines, or polylines, and polygons.
It should be noted that the same object may be represented with different primitives, according to the scale.
The main type of spatial analysis carried out on discrete geographic variables is the measure of spatial dependence.
In 1970 Waldo Tobler proposed the first law of geography stating that everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things.
This law is the foundation of the fundamental concepts of spatial dependence and spatial autocorrelation.
Typical measures of spatial autocorrelation include Moran's I,
Geary's C or Ripley's K.
On the territory these indices characterize the spatial arrangement of geographic units according to the value of a given attribute.
Here with the LISA index, for instance, red dots representing soil sampling stations with high values of potassium concentration significantly resemble each other within a spatial lag of 10 km.
A phenomenon is continuous when it is defined at every point of the geographical space and its properties vary locally in a gradual and structured way.
Examples include altitude or soil moisture, as illustrated on this map.
This type of data must be acquired by sampling.
Sampling can be random, regular, carried out according to a regular grid, along the transact, or along the pre-existing network.
Once samples are collected, it is necessary to use inference and interpolation to extend the values of point data to the entire area studied.
Among interpolation methods are the nearest neighbors, the triangle network, B-spline function, or kriging, for example.
The most common continuous variable is altitude.
The term <i>altitude</i> is commonly used to mean the height above sea level of a location, but in geography the term <i>elevation</i> is often preferred.
The elevation of the geographic location is its height above or below a fixed reference point, most commonly a reference geoid.
A digital file containing elevation measures characterizing the geo-reference nodes, or cells, of a regular grid constitutes a <i>digital elevation model</i>.
There are different ways to acquire elevation data.
The most common are leveling, photogrammetry and laser scanning.
More information about these methods can be found in the MOOC
"Éléments de Géomatique".
Digital elevation models are useful to provide quantitative measures of topography.
Global indices can be computed to characterize a relief in given areas, like mean elevation, mean slope, distance between summits of different classes.
And specific algorithms based on different window sizes are able to locally measure the horizontal and the vertical curvature, the slope, or the orientation.
All of these indicators can be represented on maps.
Digital elevation models also make it possible to calculate visible areas from a given location in the landscape, to carry out shade analysis, to calculate solar radiation, to identify drain systems, to delimit catchment areas and many other terrain analytical functions.
After the analytical phase geographic data and derived indices must be represented on maps.
This representation is controlled by rules most of which have been defined by Jacques Bertin in the context of the semiology of graphics in the seventies.
The main goal of the rules defined by this semiology is to build graphical signals as effective as possible to communicate information.
The main tools of the semiology of of graphics are a system of signs, on one hand, and visual variables, on the other hand.
This system of signs is composed of four visual structures, which are points, lines, surfaces and volumes, and whose properties can vary.
Then, there are eight visual variables that can be used to differentiate objects in a map.
The use of these variables is limited by the ability of the human eye to see differences.
Size differences must be sufficiently large for map users to identify high and low values.
Not all the variables are appropriate for every kind of data.
In particular, only size and location are truly appropriate for depicting quantities.
Visual structures and visual variables are then supported by different components on the map-- like a title, a cartographic scale, a commentary and so on-- to improve the transmission of information and participate in the production of new knowledge.
We have here a few examples to show how information on natural hazards is stored and made available in national or local regional infrastructures.
This example shows the portal to the Swiss geographical information infrastructure hosting all kinds of detailed layers on various sorts of natural hazards.
If we look a bit closer to the area of Martigny in the Rhône river valley, we can have a closer look at the flood-prone areas with a return period of 50 years-- the same thing with a return period of 100 years, over bank sedimentation-prone areas, debris flow areas, areas that are prone to snow avalanches, rock-fall-prone areas, landslide-prone areas, etc., etc.
Another example here with the canton-wide portal with specific thematic entrances showing the danger maps again-- danger maps for flooding, debris flow, landslides, etc.
Here in the area of Lausanne, there are basically along the rivers the most threatened areas.
The same thing in the canton of Neuchâtel with thematic entrances to danger maps.
The interest of all those danger maps being to share the same symbology with a given set of colors to describe the different danger levels.
