Today we will look at raising awareness for the conservation of protected areas. 
The document you should look at to complement this lesson, is the toolkit on Communication Education and Public Awareness, edited this time by the IUCN Commission on
Education and Communication.
Their website can be seen here.
So, to convince you that this aspect of protected area management is important,
I am giving you here a reminder of the Aichi
Target that includes the individual's awareness of conservation.
As you can see, it is the first target, and that is not a coincidence.
So for this lesson, once again,
Béatrice Chataignier from IUCN PAPACO in
Nairobi will help me along with her zebra, who looks like he's in great shape, and who we will call Nestor.
Like we have seen in the previous classes on governance and planning, active participation by all stakeholders in decision-making and just as much, in managing activities themselves is essential, so that they know and recognize and therefore retain the protected area's values and also so that they feel responsible for these resources.
These stakeholders could be close to the protected area, like for example, from the local community or the local politicians, or even from private neighbouring companies etc.
But these stakeholders could also be far away, like at the central services of protected areas management, users of bush meat, coal, or wood that may be living in far away towns or even farmers who pump river water down stream from a protected area.
Either way, as users, they need to understand the importance of protected areas to safeguard their future and the products that they depend on.
If the parties who intervene in and around protected areas do not become aware that the resources they use daily are limited and need to be used on a reasonable basis, and even, that some need to be preserved, then these users will continue to increase the threats weighing on the protected area, and thereby damage the ecosystems and all of the services they provide them with and that these protected areas help to preserve.
And so if all these stakeholders that we have just listed, who intervene, who actually impact these protected areas, whether that be from far away or from close by, if these parties don't become aware that, in fact, one way or another, they are affecting these protected areas, and subsequently, the ecosystems' services and the natural resources they protect, then they will continue to use them in an irrational way.
There will therefore be no hope for the future, for the sustainable use of these resources.
That is why it is vital to make them aware of the role that they have to play in the conservation of natural resources.
In Kenya, for example, the lion plays a crucial role in balancing out ecosystems of course, or even in photo tourism.
And yet, the local breeders see lions mainly as a problem, and of course, they act accordingly, which is why they need to be informed and made aware.
In practice, what should we do to reach these actors and to make them interested in the conservation of nature, in general, and particularly in protected areas?
Paradoxically, while the research, which is very extensive, shows that the situation is critical for the survival of certain species, well, that isn't enough to convince all of these actors.
Why?
Because very few of them have access to the results from the research, starting with political decision-makers.
And so, in the end, these people don't use the data, even though they are extremely relevant, because they are either rarely communicated or badly communicated; either way, they are misunderstood and eventually not used.
And that's the aim of raising awareness, it's making the data, which is so vital, available and accessible to this large panel of stakeholders.
In many Central African countries, the drop in the elephant population due to poaching for ivory is alarming, and yet if we look closely, a small percentage of poachers or traffickers, who are arrested, are eventually sanctioned by the court.
It is therefore urgent to intervene at the magistrate's level to make them aware and to educate them to treat these cases with the same severity as the stakes at play.
And these stakes impact more than just biodiversity.
For example, trafficking impacts the country's tourist economy.
Of course, we also need to intervene with ivory consumers, which are mainly Asian countries, and China in particular.
I'm sure you can imagine how hard that is.
All of this isn't easy and it is not just because something is communicated that we will see some action follow on the field.
There are many obstacles to overcome so that the information is first heard by the target audience, and of course understood, accepted, incorporated, and then implemented, and even repeated, if that is necessary.
Therefore, saying it or communicating it, does not necessarily mean doing or making them do something.
So, what do we do?
And for that, we need to first identify the emotional reasons or the customs that drive these stakeholders to act like they do.
That means we need to be able to identify their personal concerns, what they are interested in, what interests them in their daily life.
We need to make the link between natural resources that we want to protect and show them that what's best for them is to change their behaviour to preserve this resource that they are in fact using.
So this message needs to be well and truly clear, directly linked to their concerns, and so strike a chord emotionally with these parties.
It also needs to be explicit enough for them to understand exactly what they need to change and the alternative action they must perform.
That is extremely important, it is about grasping the message.
For that reason, we need to not forget that it is when we dialogue with them that adults learn best, because it is in that situation that they will be acknowledged the most and they will considered responsible learners and the experiences and the knowledge they have gained will be shared and better recognized.
For them, it is the best way to be taken into consideration and so to change how they do things.
Thus, the methods we use to raise awareness must be specifically adapted to each audience.
There are many examples of campaigns, mainly through social media nowadays.
What is therefore the actual impact of all these efforts for these awareness initiatives in terms of conservation?
At what point can we hope to see a change in behaviour?
These are very difficult questions.
How much time would we need to measure the impact of growing public awareness once it has started?
Changes brought in amongst young people, the new generation, are usually faster and easier.
It is an absolute priority to educate and to raise awareness among all these young people, all these children, because it is them who will change our society.
Have a look on the internet at some public awareness campaigns led by the big conservation NGOs.
Some of the websites are suggested here.
See if the target audiences of these campaigns have been well understood, if the messages that have been distributed give the target audience an opportunity to act at their level.
There we go, that's the end of this lesson.
The next episode will be on the Green List of protected areas.
Have a great day.
