Hello, today we are going to look at a tool, recently developed by the World Commission on Protected Areas and IUCN, which is called the Green List of Protected
Areas.
Why a Green List, what is it and what is it for?
You can find out more on the Green List website.
The address appears here.
Once again, to help me in this lesson,
I think you will recognize the team:
Nestor and his friend Béatrice.
The first question that we will ask is about the reasons behind the development of the Green List.
The IUCN Red List, that we will talk about later in this MOOC, focuses on species that are at risk of extinction, so species that are in danger.
It provides an evaluation of the major threats which put a strain on the planet's species.
We understand that identifying the threats that are urgent to counteract, to ensure preservation of biodiversity is essential.
But it is also extremely important to share the success, to show what works, wherever in the world we are.
This is exactly the purpose of the Green List, to show the protected areas that work, that have succeeded in reaching their goal of conservation, whatever their system of governance, however they are managed, no matter where in the world they are, there are successes that we must be able to share with other areas that find themselves in similar situations, that need to make progress and in order to do that, they need to be inspired by other's conservation success stories.
In short, this Green List is above all, a new label.
Do we need a new label when there are already so many?
There are in fact already many labels associated with protected areas.
But in general, they only concentrate on a few specific aspects of these protected areas.
For example, UNESCO's MAB, Man and the Biosphere designates biosphere reserves, or WWF's PAN Parks, which aim at certifying the quality of the tourism services of a site in terms of conservation.
Or another label such as Ramsar, which recognizes the importance of wetlands.
As for World Heritage, it identifies an element of the protected area as having an extraordinary universal value.
Contrary to World Heritage, which recognizes an extraordinary value within a protected area, ,a value that existed before, the Green List will be concerned with the way in which the managers will manage and govern this protected area to preserve its values in general.
So the Green List has the advantage of recognizing a job that is well done by management and then being able to share that to other sites or managers who wish to learn.
It's an important detail: contrary to World
Heritage the Green List doesn't look at the intrinsic value of the site, it is about measuring, qualifying the governance and the management of the site, in order to recognize the quality of the manager's work.
Youssouf, who is going to talk to us in the next lesson on World Heritage, will tell us a little about it now.
Although the World Heritage sites are supposedly well run, it's not the case for all of them, to the extent that they lose partially the value or values that warranted their inclusion, either due to an ineffective management system or governance.
These World Heritage Sites cannot therefore be included to the Green List, because their management system or governance does not allow the long term conservation of their outstanding universal value.
Conversely, a lot of protected areas that are eligible for the Green List, will never be able to make it onto the World
Heritage List as they do not have an outstanding universal value.
Thus the Green List is a powerful process for recognizing the efforts of managers to govern and manage their protected area well.
What these managers can expect in return, as benefits of the Green List, is firstly a greater visibility for marketing, for example, because this is a label with worldwide recognition, that can also reinforce a plea on a national level, for the recognition of protected areas within the national system of protected areas, for example.
It is also a way of lobbying to anticipate the unsustainable use of certain resources around the protected areas, and sometimes in the protected areas.
It is also helpful when it comes to fundraising, for example, it can be motivating for staff as they are seen as having done a good job.
It's a way of improving the working standards and staff competency.
Another of the major advantages that the Green
List brings, is that the protected areas that take part in this process will directly benefit from the experience and successes of the protected areas that already appear on the Green List.
So it is a way of constantly being required to progress and to improve practices on a daily basis.
So more specifically, how does the Green List work, how do you get on this list?
This is a totally voluntary procedure for areas that decide to participate this means that candidate PAs must put together their own application themselves.
This application is made up of two things.
It's easy.
One part is a questionnaire, made up of a list of indicators which give information about the requirements of the Green List.
So this is a whole list of questions to which the manager will respond.
And then, the second part of the application, is all the evidence proving that the responses on the questionnaire are true.
This can be maps, documents, reports, photos, a whole pile of evidence, proof that backs the responses on the questionnaire.
The application is then examined by a reference group, a group of experts, on a national scale which will analyse and assess the appropriateness of the supplied information in meeting the requirements of the Green List.
If this reference group is satisfied, it transfers the application to an external certifier or auditor, who will again analyse the application and check that the information is provided and with enough detail, and check that the group of experts' working method was suitable.
If the auditor is satisfied, he finally transfers the application to the global committee of the Green List, which is at IUCN's head office, and who is the independent authority that makes the final decision whether or not to include the site on the
Green List.
So how is the development of the Green List going on a worldwide level or in Africa in particular?
The pilot phase lasted two years and ended at the end of 2014.
It enabled eight countries to test the process in their countries.
Those countries are:
Korea, France, Spain, Italy,
Kenya, China, Australia and Colombia.
At the end of this pilot phase,
24 protected areas were included on the world level list.
Two of them are in Africa, in Kenya as it was the pilot country for Africa.
In Kenya, there are two private conservancies who have been added do the Green List,
Lewa and Ol Pejeta Conservancy, recognized for the excellence of their management and governance.
And now the process is up and running and it allows the inclusion of new countries and new protected areas on the Green List.
The objective is to achieve in two years a mechanism that is well-oiled and tested on the ground so that it is long lasting in Africa.
The Green List of Protected Areas is therefore, above all, a tool to stimulate learning by example by identifying and explaining best practice.
We can expect that it will progressively become a new source of motivation for all managers of protected areas around the world.
On the Green list website, the address appears here, take the time to look at the requirements and indicators and how they are outlined.
It should serve as a guide to our future activities in and around protected areas.
It is the end of this lesson.
The next episode will be about World Heritage with Youssouf, as I said earlier.
Have an excellent day.
