Hi, and welcome to the class. 
Today, we'll talk about the World Heritage Convention.
The reference reading as a complement of this class is of course, the convention itself and its operations guidelines if you would like get into more details.
A quick look at this document will help you know more quite rapidly and, of course, you can also check out UNESCO's website -
The link is right here.
You will also find on papaco.org many evaluation results of World Heritage sites conducted in Africa these last few years.
For this class, as I said in the last class, an IUCN papaco's colleague, Youssouph Diedhiou, based in Dakar, Senegal, is going to help me out.
He is specifically in charge of world heritage conservation.
So, let's see with Youssouph where this convention comes from, and what its exact purpose is.
World Heritage is the legacy of the past that we enjoy today and that we're passing on to the next generations.
World Heritage Convention looks at the sites that have an outstanding universal value that we'll define later on.
What triggered its creation was building the Assouan dam, in Egypt, that was going to flood Abou Simbel's and
Philae's temple.
Facing this threat, UNESCO started an international cooperation in 1959 in order to protect these major architectural sites.
Then started long discussions on how to set up a mecanism to protect these exceptional sites.
These discussions ended upon elaboration of a text called the Convention concerning the protection of
Cultural and Natural Heritage, that was adopted in 1972 in Paris, during the UNESCO general assembly.
This convention's objectives are to identify and protect these exceptional sites, but also to introduce them to the international community.
The convention helps States parties by reinforcing their sites management capacity.
It also helps the States parties to safeguard their sites, by reinforcing their technical capacity but also by bringing them professional assistance.
At site scale, it supports the local communities' participation to cultural and natural heritage protection.
Finally, the convention brings an international support to immediate danger exposed sites.
Youssouph told us, this convention looks at sites that have an outstanding universal value.
What does it mean, specifically?
The outstanding universal value means a cultural or natural importance that is so exceptional, that it transcend borders and that its invaluable characters stay the same for present and future generations.
This outstanding universal value has three components.
The first one affects criteria that are numbered from one to ten.
The first six criteria involve cultural sites and the last four criteria, meaning seven, eight, nine and ten, involve natural sites.
The second component is integrity.
Integrity describes the untouched values that we want to see appear on the World Heritage List.
The third and last component is the management system that must be effective in order to allow this universal value transmission to next generations.
All of this is only theorical of course, but it's the spirit of the convention.
Okay, all of this isn't necessarily very easy to understand the first time, so let's have a few examples to better understand.
For the seventh criterion, let's have a look at the Mount Kenya National Park, with its spectacular landscapes, its peaks and its cliffs.
The seventh criterion is simply relating to the beauty, the exceptional aesthetic of a territory.
For the eighth criterion, let's look at the National Park of Virunga, in Democratic
Republic of Congo.
It consists of seven volcanoes two of them being the most active in Africa right now.
The eighth criterion relates to Earth geological evolution and to what helps us understand it, or see it today.
Regarding the ninth criterion, let's look at National Park of Nakuru, that is part of a lakes network; in between which the lesser flamingos of the Rift Valley travels.
The ninth criterion shows the natural evolution of ecosystems on earth, as shown by the functioning of this migration.
Finally, the tenth criterion relates to biological diversity.
The National Park of Niokolo Koba in Senegal is a good example.
It's a very rich ecosystem, in flora and fauna, at least, at the time of its enlisting.
What is the situation of World’s Heritage sites in Africa, nowadays?
The state of conservation of African World
Heritage sites is very concerning,
With 35% of the sites registered on the in danger list some of which for over 20 years.
A site is registered on the in danger list if it's threatened by a proved, precise and upcoming danger.
For example, poaching of its biodiversity, or when it's facing serious threats, such as an upcoming conflict outburst or heavy programmed infrastructures, such as the mine on Mount Nimba in Guinea.
This deterioration of African goods is linked to several factors, and the most important are anthropic pressure such as poaching, agriculture, the development of mining.
This is conveyed by an unsuitable budget, insufficient staff, and deteriorating infrastructures.
All of this does not allow to sustainably preserve the universal outstanding value of those sites.
Since 2008, the IUCN made several assessments on management effectiveness of those sites and the overall outcomes of these assessments confirm this state of deterioration of these African world heritage sites.
A big thank you to Youssouph.
Now, we know the essential points.
Take the time to check out the UNESCO website about World Heritage.
Look at what the criteria for registration of these sites are, the ones that you know, and analyse which are the threats that they face, and why they are, or are not, at risk.
That's the end of this class.
Next episode will be the conclusion and then the homework for this week.
Have a great day!
