Working on management effectiveness is about assessing the ability of a protected area to preserve its values.
This allows to identify the quality daily work:
Am I working well?
But especially to measure its usefulness: does what I do serve a purpose?
This is the notion of responsibility tied to governance.
When done regularly, an assessment of effectiveness allows to redirect management actions to respond to identified problems.
There are numerous tools that have been developed based on the evaluation framework prepared by the World Commission of Protected
Areas.
This tool is made up of six simple and logical steps.
Where am I?
Where am I going?
What do I need?
How do I do it?
What is the result?
What has changed?
Some tools assess networks, such as RAPPAM, others focus on one site, like METT.
In all cases, the evaluation should be a voluntary process conducted by, or with, the managers, and bringing together all parties involved in the management of protected areas.
Monitoring a protected area is essential for effectiveness because it allows for threats, faced by the values, to be controlled.
Good monitoring is the result of a meaningful analysis and of prioritizing threats.
The monitoring strategy should be flexible and adjustable according to the evolution of these threats and the values concerned.
Ecological monitoring is another aspect of effectiveness and it consolidates methods of collecting and analyzing data which will measure the evolution of protected area values.
There are many direct or indirect methods.
The choice of method will depend on its effectiveness.
Ecological monitoring must be carried out by, or at least, with the managers and not simply entrusted to an external contractor who has no responsibility for the management of the area.
Effective management is also about managing together and this is widely dependent on the support and collaboration of all, when it comes to conservation.
Therefore, we have to ensure that everyone understands the priorities of protected areas.
Education and awareness enable citizens' perceptions to evolve towards a more realistic understanding of the importance of protected areas in their everyday life.
It is an essential strategy to anchor conservation as a common cause.
It is certainly difficult to measure the impact of this awareness on behavior, and yet this has to be an absolute priority.
Finally, in this module we have seen how the
Green List will enable us to recognize, at a global level, the quality of the managers' work, not only in terms of their management effectiveness, but also for the quality of their governance, which finally allows us to fully measure the responsibility of each person.
The Green List will be a powerful way to encourage protected areas to follow the best examples, by transmitting useful tools to all sites on their journey to be added to this unique list.
Now, let's start this module's test.
