Here are some images illustrating the theme of this course: African cities.
No, not city, but cities, with their numerous specificities, from Johannesburg to Brazzaville, from Dakar to Djibouti.
Why African cities?
Because their pace is accelerating, because hundreds of millions of inhabitants will move there… in the decades to come.
Thus they will go through a rapid and radical change in the futur.
There are many challenges.
There are social challenges, due to the growing inequalities… and the exclusion process within the cities.
There are spatial challenges due to the growing disparities… between big and small cities, which is to a big extent a consequence of globalisation.
But there are also environmental challenges, both on a global… and local scale.
Finally there are economical and political challenges… as long as the governance is part of the main concern of the stakeholders… of the city.
This course will let us look the main urban issues and will show us… the production mechanisms of a city.
In order to achieve our goal we have to adopt 3 points of view:
A technical, social and symbolic.
That will allow us to raise the question about the city model, and the infrastructures.
That will allow us to review the theoretical… as well as the most technical aspects of the creation of master plan.
We will see in detail how to plan and with what tools.
We will see how to balance between social environmental… and economical preference.
In order to cover that matter, the course will be presented over 12 weeks.
Each week we will study a major subject of planification.
There will be several videos… with a duration of 10 to 15 minutes each.
Each week there will also be quizzes, exercises and lectures… permitting to go into depth… as well as case studies… in order to illustrate our subject.
The exercises are an integrate part of the course and they have to be… accomplished successfully… in order to be allowed to go to following week.
That’s why we estimate the time necessary to follow this online course… to be between 4 and 6 hours.
There are no prerequisites for this course, but an interest in urban planning is necessary.
All you have to do is enrol and to follow the courses week after week.
There is no need for additional material, as all the material you need… will be provided online.
I am Dr. Jérôme Chenal, and I teach urban planning… at the EPFL in Lausanne.
For more than 15 years…
I have been studying urban issues in Africa… notably everything that has to do with planning.
I hope that I have awoken your interest in the matter…
African cities.
I am looking forward to seeing you online in February.
