[BLANK_AUDIO]
So, welcome.
I'm Maggie Montgomery, from the World
Health Organization.
And, here today to talk about the evaluation and the validation of household water treatment technology.
So, I want to thank, Dr. Johnston for inviting me.
And let's get started.
So there's going to be three main things
I'd like to talk to you about today.
The first is why is it important to assess the performance of household water treatment.
And I'll talk just briefly about the fact that household water treatment, the main benefit is health.
And so it's important that we know how well.
Household water treatment technologies remove pathogens so we have some indication of the protection of health.
And second is, I'll talk about the WHO global standards on the performance of household water treatment.
And give a bit of background about how they were developed.
And lastly, I'll talk about what WHO is doing to implement these standards.
Specifically.
Discuss the WHO International Scheme to evaluate household water treatment technologies.
There's two main reasons why it's important to assess the performance of household water treatments technology.
The first is to understand if these technologies are achieving.
The objectives of improving health, which requires, first of all that they remove the pathogens that are causing the diarrhoeal disease in a specific population.
And in some cases, we know specially which pathogens are causing that disease.
For example, in a cholera outbreak, it's very well known that is the bacterium vibrio cholerae that is causing the diarrhoeal disease.
But in other cases, for example, people living with HIV AIDS, who are more susceptible to diarrhoeal disease, it could be a suite pathogens that are causing this disease.
And in all cases, it's important that the devices that are being used with these specific populations.
Are removing the pathogens we are most concerned about.
And if we don't know exactly which pathogens those are, it is prudent to make sure that these devices remove a suite of pathogens.
The second reason why assessing household water treatment performance is important is that government especially as well as implementers and funders.
Need to know that the, the devices that they are investing in are achieving the aims that they set out to achieve.
And this requires a rigorous evaluation of household water treatment.
Now, in many countries where household water treatment is most needed, i.e.
Where the water quality is poor and the diarrhoeal disease burden is high, governments don't have the resources, nor the capacity to do such evaluations.
And lastly, I just wanted to emphasize that while today's talk is going to be focused on the performance, realizing the health benefits from household water treatment also requires that users correctly and consistently use household water treatment when their water quality is compromised.
So in order to facilitate the evaluation of household water treatment
WHO come out with global recommendations on how to assess performance.
Now, these global recommendations, the goal is to protect the health of the users and also to ensure that.
More household water treatments products that achieve minimum performance standards are being distributed and used to those that most need safe water.
Now specifically the recommendations look at three main classes of pathogens.
And these three classes of pathogens, I know you've already talked about with Dr. Johnston and hopefully you understand well at this point.
But these are the three main classes that cause diarrhoeal disease in humans and they are viruses bacteria and protozoa.
From these three classes of pathogens we derived targets and what I mean by targets we derived, what are the minimum amounts of removal that need to be achieved in order to.
Achieve a certain minimum amount of risk in a population.
Now these targets were derived based on what has already been done in the WHO guidelines for drinking water quality and these guidelines use what is called quantitative microbial risk assessment.
So quantitative microbial risk assessment are basically models that allow us to predict what will be the health consequences in a population if they ingest a certain concentration of pathogens with a certain frequency.
So for these models we obviously had to pick specific pathogens within each of these, classes of viruses, bacteria and protozoa to come up with an estimate.
Now from that estimate we also decided.
What was the minimum amount of risk we're willing to accept and I'll talk about that in the next slide, that allowed us to then develop our removal target.
We also used a tiered approach.
So rather than setting one very high bar for household water treatment, we recognized that even devices that maybe are not the best but do provide some protection and even limited protection.
Can have a very significant impact in populations where the concentrations of pathogens are very high and the disease burden is very high.
So this tiered approach was, was done to acknowledge the fact that even lesser performing devices can still have an health impact.
It was also created because we recognized in some situations it's just simply not economically feasible to have the very top device, and cheaper and perhaps less protective devices can still have an important impact. lastly, the recommendations provide some information on the laboratory protocols, or how you would actually go about doing experiments.
To test the performance of these household water treatment devices.
Before I present the performance standards,
I want just to briefly highlight what log-removal is and what it actually means when we're talking about concentrations of pathogens.
So let's say, for example, we start with cryptosporidium before we put the water through a filter.
We put the water trough the filter and filtering we have 10 cryptosporidium.
So that means we've removed 90 cyrptosporidium pretty simple math, we can equate that to a percentage and we say we have 90% removal and that is equivalent to 1 log removal.
Now let's say with that same source water we still have a 100 cryptosporidium.
But after filtering we use a better filter, a more highly performing filter.
We only have one cryptosporidium remaining in the water after it's been filtered.
This means we, we've removed 99 cryptosporidium.
Or achieved a two-log removal.
Assessing performance.
So based on the quantitative microbial risk models I spoke of earlier, we were able to develop specific reduction targets for each of the three classes of pathogens.
Based on allowable risk.
Now the most stringent requirement were the category where we're allowing the least amount of risk in a population, specifically ten to the negative six DALYs per person per year, it is a highly protective category.
Now in this category.
Devices must achieve at least four log removal of bacteria, at least five log removal of viruses and at least four log removal protozoa.
Now you'll notice, that for the viruses, the log reduction is even greater because we know viruses.
Are more likely to cause infection and disease with just a single virus, compared to the other pathogens.
Now for the protective category, we're allowing a slightly less conservative risk in the population.
It's 10 to the negative fourth DALYs.
And consequently, the log removal doesn't have to be quite as high.
Two, at least two for bacteria, at least three for viruses and at least two for protozoa.
The final category, Limited Protection, are actually technologies that achieve at least two of the targets for.
The classes of pathogens and protective.
Now, these may be technologies that do really well for two of the classes, but not on the third, and in populations where we are very sure of the main pathogen that's causing disease, they could be a very effective option.
Now, for each of these classes of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa.
We had to chose one specific organism to represent the class as a whole, in order to develop the models and come up with the specific log-reductions.
So we choose pathogens that we know in human populations do account for a significant proportion of diarrhoeal disease.
And bacteria specifically it's campylobacter, virus is rotavirus, and protozoa was cryptosporidium.
Now what are some examples of technologies that are already being used in the field and have been tested quite rigorously in the lab.
That meet these performance standards.
Well for highly protective, the number one technology or actually it's a method, is boiling.
This is by far the oldest method we have and it's very efficacious in the removal.
But the problem with boiling is re contamination, so that's an important issue to consider.
Ultra fi, filters, I know you've just learned about filtration, are also very efficacious as well as a comb, combination of approaches.
So you may do filtering followed by chlorination in order to achieve a higher level of protection.
In the middle category we have membrane filters as well as many flocculant-disinfectant.
And lastly in limited production category some examples include chlorine which we know is very effective against bacteria especially cholera, but fairly ineffective against protozoa.
Especially cryptosporidium.
Ceramic filters and some bio-sand filters also fall into this limited protection category.
Now you may wonder why did we have three levels of performance.
Well there's two main reasons.
First of all, we know in populations where there is a high burden of diarrhoeal disease and a high load of, of fecal contamination in the environment and, and therefore in the drinking water.
Even devices that achieved the protective or limited protection level could have a significant impact on health.
We also know that in many of these areas, economics and cost are huge barrier.
And, sometimes The highly protective devices may also be cost-prohibitive.
So we don't want to prevent other, maybe lesser-performing but still having some protection devices, such as protective and limited protection from reaching those populations.
Nuts and bolts of testing.
So how do we actually.
Test these devices and what kind of water do we use, to see that we're actually achieving a certain level of performance.
Well we want to really mimic the types of waters that we find in the environments and communities that would use these devices.
So, in order to do this.
We've developed two types of waters.
The first is a general test water.
Now this is water that represents high quality groundwater or rainwater.
It will have a very low turbidity, so there's not a lot of particulates, in the water, and a fairly, a temperature that is fairly consistent with the ambient temperature It is the non-stressed phase of testing so it's not technology specific.
We also though, want to see how these devices will perform when we have really turbid or contaminated water like this river that you see here in Lao.
Many people are still using surface water and this challenge water is supposed to represent.
Such surface waters like rivers or ponds so the turbidity is very high as well as the TOC.
Now this is the stressed phase challenge phase of testing and depending on the different product, we may vary the conditions, as different products will fail.
Under different con, conditions.
Depending on whether or not it's a filter or a chemical additive or some combination of approaches.
We've talked about why it's important to assess the performance of household water treatment.
And we've also talked about the global recommendations on performance of household water treatment.
The third thing I want to talked about.
Is the WHO scheme to evaluate household water treatment technologies with, which is specifically how WHO and government are working to implement these recommendations.
There's two main objectives to this scheme.
The first is to promote and coordinate the independent testing and evaluation of household water treatment products Based on the WHO criteria.
I would like to stress the word independent because often we find that laboratories, especially in particular countries, do not have the ability to provide independence and objectives.
Evaluations.
The second, is to support national governments in building the technical capacity of research institutions.
So, improve the ability for governments to assess local products, to do complimentary testing, in the field of household water treatment products.
Especially after they've been in use for some time.
And this is all linked to WHO's greater work in water quality.
On applying the WHO guidelines on drinking water quality.
I'd like to explain a bit about how the scheme works and in order to do that, highlight the scheme actors and the components.
First of all, just wanted to mention that
WHO is hosting the scheme secretariat and managing all the different pieces and actors within the scheme.
Providing advice to WHO is the Independent
Advisory Committee, so this a group of experts who are reviewing the test protocols and the test results and providing recommendations on how products should be tested and what level of performance they've reached.
There's also, of course, the manufacturers.
And the manufacturers are submitting their products for testing.
The designated testing laboratories, currently we have two, one in the United States and one in the Netherlands, are doing the actual testing of the products.
Now, at the same time, this scheme is very interested in building up a whole group of laboratories that can do complementary testing especially in countries.
Where household water treatment is most often used.
Lastly, we have government, UN agencies, donors, all those groups of entities that are procuring, regulating and distributing household water treatment devices.
And, finally, and perhaps most importantly, we have the users.
And the, the scheme also aims to help users make informed choices about the products they're using and the protection they're receiving.
There's three main steps to the scheme.
It's fairly simple.
The first are the submissions, and those are received by WHO from the manufacturers.
The second is the testing.
And as I mentioned the testing will occur initially in these two designated testing laboratories.
And lastly, we have the results and the dissemination of those testings.
The overall aim of the scheme is to reduce diarrhoeal disease through safe or effective microbially effective household treatment technologies.
Now there's three main outcomes related to this.
The first is to provide a publicly available list of products tested.
And those summary results whether or not the product passes or fails to meet one of our three level performance standards on the WHO website.
The second is to work with governments and specifically the member states of the
World Health Organization.
To ensure that their national regulations start to reflect some of the recommendations the WHO has made in regards to health risks.
And achieving specific levels of performance.
And, lastly is to strengthen the national capacity of research institutions, of laboratories, in order to enable them to test local products as well as products in the field.
A number of capacity-building activities are associated with this scheme.
The first is to train officials in risk-based assessments.
So this could be related to house water treatment, but it could be related.
To community water supplies as well and for them to understand how they can address these risks and manage these risks to provide better protection for health.
The second is I already mentioned is to strengthen the national laboratory capacity in terms of skills and equipment.
The third is to align where possible, with water quality surveillance efforts.
So we find more and more, there's work going on to assess water quality not only at the source, but also in the household.
Lastly I just wanted to mention that
Ethiopia as an example of a country that has already begun.
Applying the WHO recommendations on household water treatment and recently they were able to use these recommendations to prevent a particular product from being distributed because it didn't meet the minimum standards for WHO.
So we plan to work with more countries like Ethiopia that are very interested in improving the way that they assess these products and ensuring that those products that are distributed.
Meet the minimum standards.
In summary, I'd like to stress two main points.
First hopefully by now you've understood that the assessment of household water treatment performance is important for protecting health.
Now, I spoke only about the microbiological performance of house water treatment.
The chemical performance of house water treatment also is important and is something that WHO recognizes.
Needs to be addresses, but hasn't been developed yet in terms of a set of global guidelines.
I also want to make sure you leave by remembering that is equally important that these products are used correctly and consistently by the groups that are most at risk for diarrhoeal disease.
So young children, people with HIV/AIDS, those in emergencies or in cholera outbreaks are just a few examples.
Secondly, the WHO International Scheme to
Evaluate household water treatment aims first of all to inform and to provide objective information about performance but it also hopes to spark innovation.
And already we're seeing that manufacturers are trying to develop technologies that not only are highly protective but also are low cost.
Easy to use and can be easily distributed in places where water quality is its poorest.
And lastly, the scheme aims to build capacity so someday in, in the future, we can work ourselves out of, out of a job, and governments themselves can evaluate and regulate household water treatment technologies.
So would like to thank you for your attention.
I'd like to point you to some additional resources and information.
First of all, if you want to read the performance recommendations
I spoke about, you can find them online at this web address.
These are the recommendations.
Also if you want to learn more about the scheme, you can go to the website that presents all the information about the scheme, their related protocols, the laboratories.
And lastly, if you're just interested in household water treatment more generally,
I refer you.
To the WHO/UNICEF international Network on
Household water treatment and safe storage.
Which is working on a variety of issues, to try to make sure household water treatment, gets to where it's needed, and used by those most in need.
So thank you.
