Spacewalking is a really important capability that has been brought in human space flight since 1965; really essential.
If we want to do repairs on the spaceship wether it is the Space Shuttle, or some payload in the Space Shuttle, or to do repair work on telescope, like was a case for the Hubble Space Telescope during the Shuttle time, or for the assembly of the International Space Station, or for repairs on the International Space Station, spacewalking is really an essential tool, that normally a combination of robotics and spacewalking is what is being used for this repair maintenance work.
Now, there has been a number of Hollywood productions that have shown spacewalking EVAs, and two of the recent ones are
"Gravity" and "The Martian". these are good movies, very entertaining,
I don't have any problem with these movies and I had a lot of fun watching them, but the spacewalking that you see in them is not really like the real spacewalking.
A lot of it is untethered space walking.
Of course, when the tether breaks like here, it's untethered, but even in controlled spacewalking at the end of the movie, "The Martian", when Matt Damon is recovered on orbit around Mars but a rescue team from the Earth, there is a lot of untethered spacewalking and rapid movement also, you go from one place to the other rapidly spacewalking.
There is also a lot of yelling and shouting; not really the way we do really EVAs.
But again, entertaining movies, but EVAs are not really like that.
In reality, spacewalking is something you do very slowly, in a very controlled manner.
And all of the words exchanged between the Mission Control Center and the crew on board the spaceship and spacewalkers, normally two spacewalkers at a time, there are very calm words, and very controlled.
That's a nice picture that was taken on the second servicing mission of the Hubble Space Telescope in 1997, a very beautiful picture, where you see the Earth, you see the Sun, you see the background of the space completely black, and you see the spacewalker with one light.
You know, you you go around the Earth and if you spacewalk for six hours, you go four times around the Earth, so it's day and night, day and night, day and night, and when it's orbital night, you illuminate the place of work using these floodlights, and you continue working.
You don't sleep during the orbital night, you continue working.
Alexander Gerst, ESA astronaut of German nationality, and Reid Wiseman, an American astronaut, did a spacewalk in October, 2014, from the International Space Station to do some repair work on the cooling pumps and on the power system for the ISS robotic arm, and recently, there's been a good production made in Germany of this spacewalk.
It's called
"Zero Gravity: Mission in Space".
It's been shown now, at the beginning of 2016 in movie theaters in Germany, and it will surely be shown in other places very soon; so, if you have the opportunity, have a look,
"Zero Gravity: Mission in Space".
The history of spacewalking: the first spacewalk was done by Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, on March 18, 1965.
It was a very short spacewalk, only 12 minutes, and he came out--he was untethered, but there was umbilical, at that time, there was no portable life support system, and the resources of oxygen and the communications, this was all done by an umbilical.
He went out, and there was a pretty difficult moment where he had difficulties getting back in the airlock because his spacesuit, for some reason, inflated somewhat, and it was very difficult moment for Alexei, and he was smart to deflate somewhat his suit, but obviously, if you do that, you came in danger, because if you are at a too low pressure, of gas over your body, then you risk your life, or you can have severe problems.
Anyway, he made it, but it was a very tough exercise for Alexei Leonov, but he opened the way to spacewalking, and there were many, many, many spacewalks that followed.
By the way, for ISS, there's nearly 200 spacewalks that were performed for the assembly of ISS, including spacewalks that were done from the ISS for maintenance of the facility.
A few weeks later, we had the first American doing a spacewalk,
Ed White, you see him here.
Again, no portable life support system, but an umbilical cord, and on his right hand here, he has a kind of a gas pistol he was trying to use in order to propel himself in the vicinity of the spacecraft.
It didn't work too well, it's very difficult; if the thrust vector of such a system is not along the center of the mass of the astronaut and his spacesuit, you're going to generate rotation in addition to translation.
But anyway, he tried that, and it was the first American spacewalk and successful.
On the US side we had the Mercury program, the Gemini program, and then Apollo.
On Gemini we had already a few spacewalks that were performed, and a special suit was developed for space walking on the surface of the Moon, so crew activity on the surface of our satellite.
And you see a nice picture, a very well-known picture on the left-hand side.
This is Buzz Aldrin in his Moon surface spacesuit; at that time, NASA had developed portable life support systems, so you don't have an umbilical between the spaceship and the spacewalker.
And, of course, you don't have a safety tether because you are on the surface of a celestial body.
The whole Apollo program continued, with Apollo 12, 13-- that didn't reach the Moon, as you know--
14, 15, 16, and 17.
On the right-hand side, you have Apollo 16.
It's Charlie Duke, the lunar module pilot spacewalking on the surface of the Moon, and at that time-- it started already with Apollo 15--
NASA developed technically, and assembled, a lunar jeep, an electrically-driven lunar jeep that was carried on these last missions of the Apollo program, and you see it here.
It allowed the crew to go further away, from the lunar module landing point, and hadn't been possible on the previous missions.
For the Shuttle program,
NASA developed a new spacesuit, the so-called EMU,
Extravehicular Mobility Unit, and you see it here, the first spacewalk out of the Space Shuttle on the sixth Shuttle mission in April, 1983.
Story Musgrave and Don Peterson were the two crew members, and you see the portable life support system, like a backpack, at the back of every astronaut, and, by the way, you see here, a safety tether.
Of course, all of these spacewalks, were always tethered.
There was no propulsion system on the astronaut, and he or she had to be tethered to the spaceship.
NASA developed then the so-called
Manned Maneuvering Unit.
It's a small personal spaceship allowing a spacewalker to take it out of the payload bay and then move away from the Shuttle being untethered.
We will talk more about the Manned Maneuvering Unit, later, in a later video, but this is a great picture of Bruce McCandless, on the first flight of the Manned Maneuvering Unit, in 1984.
The first woman spacewalk was done by Svetlana Savitskaya, in July 1984.
So, again, the Soviets marked the first year with the first woman spacewalker.
You see the pretty large life support system on the right-hand side.
Again, it's an autonomous spacesuit without an umbilical, and all of the life support is brought from this life support system in the back.
This is the first ISS spacewalk on the Shuttle mission STS-88 in December, 1998.
We had an American NASA astronaut
Jerry Ross, and Jim Newman, two spacewalkers, and this was in conjunction with the mating of the first US element
Node 1 of the Unity node to the Zarya Russian module.
And these two spacewalkers performed two spacewalks in order to do the mating of cables and various lines between the two first units of the International Space Station.
Now, some details I can show you on the right-hand side: you see that in front of his chest, we have a so-called mini workstation that it attached at this point here, and this allowed the crew member wearing the EMU, the Extravehicular Mobility Unit of NASA to store a certain number of equipment.
And you see here, for instance, the power tool called the PGT, the pistol grip tool.
Another interesting detail is this feature here: this is the so-called semi-rigid tether.
You could attach the end of the tether to the structure, and then you could tighten them both in order to make this tether rigid.
So it was allowing you, as a crew member, to be stabilized in a given location to perform a certain task.
And this is me, on STS-103, the third servicing mission of the Hubble Space Telescope.
I had the pleasure to perform
EVA number 2, out of 3, together with Mike Foale.
We spent about eight hours and 10 minutes outside to, on one hand, install a new computer on the Hubble Space Telescope and exchange one of the fine guidance sensors, fine guidance sensor number 2.
And here I am, in the payload bay,
I have my feet locked in the structure of the payload bay, and I'm using my two hands to unbolt, to remove some bolts on this firm, stabilized container that contained a new computer for Hubble. did you see I have also this famous pistol grip tool that I mentioned before.
What is interesting is that we had the payload oriented to the Earth.
You see the reflection of the Earth on the upper part of my visor.
So I had the head toward the Earth, but what is interesting also is that we always had the feeling that down, where our feet are, was not at all perturbed by the fact that I had the Earth above me, and I'm upside down, for me, down, was where my feet were.
We spent quite some time outside; we had some problems, the spacewalk was planned for about seven hours, but we had difficulties inserting the new fine guiding sensor, so the spacewalk lasted eight hours and ten minutes, which was relatively close to the limit.
The limit is approximately eight and a half hours, in terms of the electrical power available, in the life support system, portable life support system, and also oxygen available.
We've had, of course, Russian spacewalks, or Soviet spacewalks, and Russian spacewalks, and the US spacewalks, but the Chinese did that too, and in September 2008, they had their first spacewalk.
You see a picture on the right-hand side in the vicinity of the Tiangong Space Station,
Tiangong 1 Space Station, and you see the Chinese flag.
So that's really a Chinese spacewalk.
Well, spacewalks normally go well when there is a lot of support from the crew on board of the spaceship, whether it's the Shuttle in the past or the International Space Station now, and if there is also support from the ground,
The ground has a lot of data received by telemetry, and they can monitor what's going on.
They've also TV pictures in real time, so it's a very, very controlled exercise, but sometimes there are problems, technical problems.
And on a recent spacewalk by ESA astronaut Luca Parmitano, from Italy, on July 16, 2013, after a few hours of spacewalk, we had a problem with the water leak inside the helmet of Luca Parmitano's spacesuit.
And this was obviously, a very dangerous situation because, if you have too much water in the helmet, then you may have a problem with breathing.
It was a pretty tough situation, and the ground requested the crew to go back to the airlock pretty rapidly, which they did, and Luca's was OK, but it was a tough situation, and an indication that although, again, most of the times, things go well, sometimes, you have problems, and it's the training, and the huge support of various people with a lot of knowledge about the system that can save the situation.
Luca Parmitano is a superman in space.
But recently, on January 15, 2016, we had a spacewalk of two Tims:
Tim Kopra of NASA, and Tim Peake, British astronaut of the European Space Agency.
For Tim Peake it was his first spacewalk.
They went out of the airlock, and they started to work according to what they had to do.
However, we, again, had a problem, with some water leaking inside the helmet of Tim Kopra.
So the spacewalk was shortened, it lasted only four hours, and they could accomplish most of their tasks, but still, the EMUs are becoming old, this has been used during the Shuttle Program, it's of course refurbished, and maintained in the best conditions as possible, but obviously, there is some work needed in order to ensure the safety of the spacewalking astronauts in the future, using the EMU.
On the left-hand side, you see Tim Peake still in the airlock.
You see the British flag on his left shoulder.
Obviously this is Tim Peake and not Tim Kopra.
You see also, the two floodlights on the both sides of the upper part of this helmet to illuminate the place of work during the orbital nights.
And close to his right hand you see the so-called SCU, the Service and Cooling Umbilical; as long as the astronauts are in the airlock, they wear this umbilical that provides them with cooling water, and oxygen, and electrical power, and communication, and is detached shortly before they come out of the airlock through the outer hatch.
