In this video, we'll cover the subject of space suits, and also, some mobility aids for spacewalking astronauts.
But before we had space suits, we had high altitude pilot suits in high flying airplanes like the X-15, which you see here, which had the record of height and speed for any airplane in fact, it went even into space, more than 100 km altitude on some of the flights.
The pilot here is Joe Engle, who was an X-15 pilot, and became later an astronaut in the Shuttle program.
Now, the idea was the following: to protect the pilot against the low pressure inside the cabin, either you had a partial cabin pressure, you had some pressurization inside the cockpit, but to a value that was either not acceptable for survival-- in this case you had to have a pressure suit-- or it was maybe a value that was just acceptable, but you wanted to be protected in case of a cabin pressure.
On any airplane, with a pressurized cabin, you always want to have a rescue possibility, in case you lose cabin pressure.
So again, X-15, U-2 and many other high flying airplanes necessitated for the pilot to be protected with a high altitude pilot suit.
And all the space suits that were developed later, for the space program, were developed from this kind of suit.
Well, this was quite a jump by Felix Baumgartner in October 2012.
He holds the record of the highest altitude for a parachute jump; it was 39 kilometers above the Earth surface on a helium filled balloon.
It was in Arizona, but he is an Austrian citizen.
And this project was sponsored by Red Bull.
And here you see him just leaving his cabin,
39 kilometers altitude.
He had a full pressure suit that was developed by David Clark Company in the US.
In fact, it was very close to a spacewalking suit, because for the first, I would say,
30 seconds of his jump, the air is so thin, that for him, it was like if you'd been spacewalking in near vacuum.
After about 30 seconds, because of the completely negligible drag, due to the residual atmosphere, he reached a velocity higher than the velocity of sound.
In fact, he reached about 1.25 Mach before reaching the lower layers of the atmosphere where the drag started to reduce speed, and then, he had some problems with the control of his body.
He went into a kind of a spin, and had to put quite a lot of effort in order to stabilize himself, and the rest of the lower part of the jump was more classical, but the high part was certainly very close to being in space and doing a spacewalk.
Now this is a launch, and the entry suit that was used on the Shuttle for all the crew members.
This was a development following the Challenger accident in 1986.
The idea was the following: to protect the crew against loss at cabin pressure during the ascent.
The suit was a partial pressured suit, but it provided enough pressure on the body in order to assure the crew survival in the case of a loss of cabin pressure.
And also, after the Challenger accident, all the crew members were equipped with parachutes, and there was a possibility, in case of multiple engine failure during the ascent, and the possibility of getting a stable glide of the Shuttle over the Atlantic Ocean.
Then, pyrotechnically, the outer hatch or the side hatch of the Shuttle would have been exploded or opened pyrotechnically, and all the crew members would have jumped out with the parachute, and of course, they would have been protected with a launch-and-entry suit.
But again, is not a full pressure suit-- they do not allow at all spacewalking-- but it was for protection of the crew during ascent and entry of the Space Shuttle.
Together with the Shuttle Program,
NASA developed the EMU, or contractors of NASA developed the EMU--
Extravehicular Mobility Unit-- you see here the suit used for the Shuttle Program, and also, subsequently, used in the ISS program.
Now, you see the portable life support system here, containing the oxygen, for about eight and a half hours of spacewalking, including a secondary oxygen pack.
In case the main oxygen tank for some reason, had a leak, or was not providing enough oxygen to the astronaut, we could engage a secondary oxygen pack and then go to the airlock as soon as possible, because it was limited supply.
The pressure in the suit was 4.3 pound per square inch, which is about a third of a bar, so a third of the atmospheric pressure on Earth at sea level.
And of course, is provided enough partial pressure of oxygen for the crew to breathe, obviously, because it was even larger than the partial pressure of oxygen at sea level of the atmosphere, which is only 0.2 bar.
But of course, it was still a relatively low pressure and it necessitated pre-breathing of pure oxygen before lowering the pressure in the airlock to start the spacewalk.
Pre-breathing was necessary to eliminate the nitrogen dissolved in the blood and avoid the bends.
Again, you see the control unit was on the chest of the astronauts, and it allowed the crew member to put various tools, or various equipments, attached to him.
And interesting detail: here you see a so-called portable foot restraint.
If we had to do a job spacewalking where both hands were needed to do the job-- we could not use one hand to hold the structure, and the other to work-- so then, we had to lock our feet somewhere and either they were locked at the structure, like you saw in the picture where I was on the previous video doing work in the payload bay,
I could lock my feet in the payload bay and use both hands, but if this it was not possible, we had to take a portable foot restraint, installed it to the convenient location, and then we could lock our feet in that foot restraint, and used then, both hands and both arms to do the job.
Some details about the control system for the suit.
In fact, a space suit is like a personal spacecraft, in a way, and you have to operate the various systems using this display and control module, which was on the chest, but that was not really directly visible, because you can only see in front of you a little bit above, on the side, but you can't see down.
We had a mirror on the left wrist, giving us a reflection of what was on the DCM, and also, all of the numbers and the letters here.
You see they are all mirror-represented, letters and numbers, because we saw this through this mirror on the left wrist.
Here you had the control of the cooling, you could by-pass some of the cooling system so as to get a warmer temperature inside the suit; you have a control of the pressure inside the suit; a display intensity control and volume control for the radio.
By the way, display: we had here an alpha numeric display, a caution warning system, informing us for instance, about the deviation from normal pressure--
I mentioned the 4.3. pounds per square inch, the normal pressure of the oxygen; but if the pressure was going below a certain value, we had a caution warning, acoustical warning, and we had the indication of the pressure.
Other parameters, like partial pressure of carbon dioxide or voltage in the battery, in the portable life support system, where indicated on the caution warning system.
And there were procedures that were either voiced by the crew on board of the Shuttle, or voice by the mission control center, the expert in EVA, or we had a little flip book on our left wrist, with the main emergency procedures, and this was all subject of a training prior to going to space, and performing the EVAs.
As far as mobility is concerned, normally, there were two ways of bringing an astronaut to the place of work.
If the robotic arm of the Shuttle was used, then there was a platform at the end of the robotic arm, and the astronaut in question was brought to his place of work by the robotic arm operated inside the Shuttle.
Or, the other crew member because there was only one robotic arm was himself or herself, responsible for his or her displacement using hand rails along the fuselage.
Or, for instance, for Hubble, on the surface of the telescope.
But NASA, at some point, decided to develop a system that allowed free mobility of a spacewalking crew member, that's the Manned Maneuvering Unit, and the spacewalking crew member was just donning the Manned Maneuvering Unit, which was installed at payload bay, and had, classically, for his right hand, the rotational hand controller, and on his left hand, the translation hand controller-- this is is a classic, as well for the Space Shuttle, for the robotic arm or for the Manned Maneuvering Unit, it is always the same distribution of a task: rotation on the right and translation on the left, which is pretty much like an airplane where you have, in a single seater plane you have the throttle on the left-hand side, and rotation of the control stick on the right-hand.
Now, the Manned Maneuvering Unit, was loaded with a thruster system called GAS thruster.
It had a tank of cold nitrogen and you see here, some of the nozzles, allowing translation or rotation according to the inputs that were made on the rotation or translation hand controllers.
So, this allowed the crew to move away from the Space Shuttle, maybe towards the satellite to be rescued, totally autonomously, and without a safety tether attached to the Shuttle.
Some details on the Manned Maneuvering Unit: this is a structure that was, in a way, hosting the Manned Maneuvering Unit.
It was located at the front fuselage on the port-side of the fuselage closed to the forward bulk head, and the Manned Maneuvering Unit was attached to this structure.
When the astronaut wanted to move away, he had to detach the Manned Maneuvering Unit from this holding structure.
On the left-hand side, you see the two controllers that allowed the rotation and translation, that were located to the end of these arms that were just in the proper position for the right hand to the left hand of the astronauts.
In the bottom, you see, it's in French here, there's a lot of designation of various features in the Manned Maneuvering Unit but again, the main and interesting features are really the thruster control-- they are up here-- of course they were in the back also, and on the other side, on the right-hand side.
In order to do a full control and rotation and translation of the Manned Maneuvering Unit.
There were only a few missions where the Manned Maneuvering Unit was practically used, but one rather famous mission was the mission 51A in November 1984, when astronauts with the Shuttle deployed two satellites, two communication satellites, on one hand, and then recovered two malfunctioning communication satellites, and here you see one of the astronauts in the Manned Maneuvering Unit, not tethered to the Space Shuttle.
With a special system called the Stinger, that allowed him to approach the slowly rotating satellite and so, the Stinger into the satellite itself, and that part is uncovered here, the both of the cylinder, and then he could use the thruster system of his Manned Maneuvering Unit in order to slow down the rotation of the satellite, then the satellite was brought to the payload bay of the Shuttle, was recovered and was brought back down to Earth.
So this is an interesting practical utilization of the Manned Maneuvering Unit.
After few Shuttle flights with practically re-utilization of the Manned Maneuvering Unit, it became clear however that the bulky spaceship, in a way, personal spaceship, was not going to be very useful for a practical application like servicing the Hubble Space Telescope or assembly of the International Space Station.
So the project was abandoned, although it was technically, really interesting; it had great capabilities, and operationally, it was quite interesting also, but it was abandoned.
What it was developed however is kind of a baby of the Manned Maneuvering Unit, that it's called
Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue.
The idea was the following: if you do a spacewalk from the Space Shuttle, and normally you hold the structure, or you are on a portable foot restraint, or somehow, you are restrained, or you are possibly at the end of the robotic arm on a holding platform, and then you have your safety tether; so, in case you don't hold the structure anymore, you have the safety tether to come back to the spaceship.
Now, in the case of the Shuttle, in case you are not holding the structure, and your safety tether was not attached properly, you would just drift away from the Shuttle, but the Shuttle had maneuvering capabilities and could come and rescue you.
Normally, we were always two persons doing the spacewalk, so one of them maybe would be floating away, the Commander of the Shuttle, or the pilot, would move the Shuttle, so that the other crew member, still attached with this safety tether at the payload bay could grab his colleague attached to the safety tether.
And we had a third way of rescuing the spacewalking crew member this way.
Again, holding the structure is one way, safety tether is another way, the third way was motion of the Space Shuttle towards the astronaut to be rescued.
For the International Space Station it is not possible, because the ISS can, of course, control its orientation, its altitude, but it cannot translate.
So if we had a spacewalking astronaut in the vicinity of the Space Shuttle, suddenly detached from the structure, and the safety tether not safely attached, there would be no other way.
In order to bring that third way, rescuing the astronaut in this situation,
NASA developed the Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue.
It's a mini Manned Maneuvering Unit, but it would only allow the possibility for the crew member to come back to the station after being detached inadvertently.
And here you see, it had to be attached to the life support system in the back, and it had cold GAS thrusters, we see some of the nozzles here, and there, enough nozzles to do a full control of the rotation and translation and it had also an altitude hold, inertial altitude hold mode; and you could select all of these on this little control unit which you had here, which you had to deploy in case you were in the situation floating away.
Here you see an ISS spacewalking astronaut with this extension of the portable life support system which was a SAFER itself.
And again, it was carried on all of the Shuttle missions for assembly at the International Space Station and for all the International Space
Station-based spacewalk out of the US-airlock; all the crew members had the SAFER installed on their portable life support system.
Here we see the preparation of a spacewalk by two astronauts,
European Space Agency astronauts,
Luca Parmitano from Italy, and Chris Cassidy, NASA astronaut, inside the ISS airlock.
And if we look from left to right, and top to bottom, here we see Luca Parmitano in the so-called LCVG,
Liquid Cooling and Ventilation Garment.
It's an undergarment that all spacewalking astronauts have and the suit itself is filled with little plastic tubes, filled themselves with water; the water is put in circulation with a pump, and it goes through a sublimator that cools down the water and can regulate the temperature of the body and eliminates the metabolic heat inside the space suit.
And these parts here are the ventilation garment that ventilate oxygen inside the suit.
And you see both of the spacesuits are installed on the wall.
Here you'll still have the pants, in the bottom, and you have these so-called hard upper torso that it's fixed against the wall.
And what the crew members have to do-- here you see Luca that just removed the trousers and put them on himself-- and he is getting ready to come into the hard upper torso from the bottom, and this is the difficult part.
You have to come from the bottom, and extend your arms upwards, and put your arms inside the suit arms themselves and then put your arms down when your head goes through the top, the ring here, which you see on this picture.
That's the next step of preparation; you see Chris Cassidy doing the same thing here, on the left-hand side.
Let’s look in the lower left picture.
Now you have the gloves being installed, for both crew members, and you have the helmets, so the crew members are ready then to do the functional check of the spacesuits before closing the inner hatch of the airlock, evacuating the airlock, and doing their sortie.
This is Orlan spacesuit, developed by the Soviets first, and then the Russians, and there were several steps in the development of this suit.
It has a somehow higher pressure of pure oxygen inside the suit,
5.7. pounds per square inch, versus 4.3 for the NASA EMU.
One advantage of the Orlan spacesuit is that it's easier to get in.
I described before the difficult way to get in the EMU, with the different steps, and the difficult step being to come inside the hard upper torso from below, but here the crew member just jumps in the suit, it's much more rapid than with the EMU, putting his or her feet down and then, closing the "door" in the back, in this door, you have all the systems, like the supply of oxygen, the moisture separator, the cartridge to remove the carbon dioxide, and all of the systems are in the door, which you close behind you with the help of somebody.
This is a nice picture of an astronaut doing a spacewalk outside of the International 
Space Station, with the Orlan Russian spacesuit.
There is an interesting detail: here you see the mirror, on the left wrist of the cosmonaut, pretty much like in the US.
There are a lot of solutions that had been-- that are common to the EMU and the Orlan suit, and this is the case.
Also for this mirror, that allows the crew member to see the wording, which is mirror-reversed on the front part which is not visible by the astronaut.
Most of the spacewalks were spacewalks using the EMU for the assembly of the International Space Station, but on a regular basis we have cosmonauts doing spacewalks mainly in conjunction with the health status of the Russian segment of the International Space Station, and using the Orlan spacesuit, which is a very successful suit.
By the way, you see also here, the lights of the flash light allowing the illumination of the place of work during the orbital night, and you have a small back hole which are cameras, in fact.
You have the same in the EMU.
