We'll cover the subject of robotics for the Space Shuttle and for the International
Space Station in this video.
As you know, Canada was a producer of, as well, the SRMS,
Shuttle Remote Manipulator System, and the SSRMS,
Space Station Robotic Maneuvering System.
Sometimes, we call them Canadarm-- just Canadarm, or Canadarm One for the Shuttle and Canadarm Two for the International Space Station.
So, this has become really a specialty of the Canadians, and these are machines that have been working extremely well, are very reliable, for both Shuttle and Station.
Here, you see an example of the utilization of Canadarm One.
When it's in the rest position, it's along the... port seal of the fuselage of the Space Shuttle.
Or, if you look toward the nose, it's on the left-hand side.
And then it's being deployed.
It has two joints on the shoulder, one joint on the elbow, and three joints on the wrist, and as far as the Shuttle is concerned, that was the same for the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth servicing mission.
This is STS-125, which was the last one, the fifth one, in May of 2009.
We had to come with the Space Shuttle in a quite precise relative position to the telescope, and then, the robot arm operator, at some point, was saying, "I can go and get it," to the commander flying the Shuttle, and then it was his task to go and grapple the telescope.
There were two grapple fixtures, one here and the other one there, and here the arm is not quite ready to grapple, but it's maneuvering towards a grappling position for the telescope.
Then, the telescope was moved with the arm, over that platform here at the back of the payload bay, which is a rotating platform, and for the following days, there were spacewalks that were planned, and we always oriented toward the front of the payload bay the area of the telescope where the intervention was going to take place on a specific spacewalk.
Now, again, for Hubble servicing missions, beyond the task of grappling the telescope, installing it on that structure in the back of the payload bay, the Shuttle arm was used, or Canadarm was used for every spacewalk, to move one of the two spacewalking crew members to his or her position of work.
This is taken with a fish-eye lens, so it looks like we are very high over the Earth's surface.
In fact, we were 600 kilometers.
And the arm seems a little bit deformed also; obviously, this section of the arm is straight.
And you see the telescope in the back of the payload bay.
This is the SRMS, or the Canadarm.
Again, you have the shoulder, yaw joints, and the pitch joints.
You have two joints for the shoulder.
You have only one joint for the elbow, pretty much like a human arm, and you have three joints for the wrist.
So, six joints total, which mean that if you-- for the end effector wanted to come to a certain position, x, y, z in a specific coordinate system related to the Shuttle payload bay, and with a given orientation-- pitch, yaw, and roll-- then you had a one-to-one correlation between the six numbers for the joints and the six numbers for the position and orientation of the end effector.
You had also two cameras.
This is closed-circuit TV-- that's for CCTV on the elbow, and you had also a camera on the wrist which was used in order to capture an object like the Hubble Space Telescope.
You had certain targets near the grapple fixture attached to the system to be captured, and you were looking at that target with the camera, and you could position the arm on the basis of the view from that wrist camera.
Now, the SSRMS, or the Canadarm Two is different from the SRMS in the sense that we have a perfectly symmetric arm.
This cluster and this cluster, are exactly the same.
And we have three joints at each end, which is six, plus the elbow joint which is one degree of freedom, so we have a grand total of seven joints, and of course, this configuration was chosen so that any end can become the anchor point of the arm, and the other end is becoming the end effector, or vice versa.
The arm can "walk", in a way, like a caterpillar, from one anchor point to the other one, using this totally symmetric capability of the arm.
Both ends are exactly the same.
We have a view of Canadarm 2, again, with the two ends which are exactly symmetric.
We had a few more cameras on the Canadarm 2.
We have a camera at one end, and a camera at the other end, and we had extra cameras on each of the branches of the Canadarm, so we had a grand total of four cameras.
The fact that we had more joints than degrees of freedom was an advantage, because we could modify the geometry of the arm to go from one place to the other.
We could do a so-called pitch-plane change in order to avoid hitting structures.
So, there's more flexibility, but also, to a certain degree, more operational challenge for the operator of the arm.
The end effector or free end of the Canadarm 2, of course, is exactly the same, as I mentioned before, as the anchor point.
But it differs from the end effector of the Canadarm or the Shuttle robotic arm in the sense that you have these four features that allowed the anchoring of the end of the SSRMS that was going to be attached to structure.
Of course, this was not applicable for the Shuttle robotic arm.
On several steps of the assembly of the International Space Station, we had one piece of equipment-- and here, it's this piece of equipment-- that was taken out of the payload bay of the Shuttle using the Shuttle robotic arm, then it was handed off to the Station robotic arm, which is here.
So, a hand-off operation was quite a common operation in robotics, during Space Station assembly.
On this picture, you see the bottom part of the SSRMS attached to structure here, with these four capture features surrounding the end effector, and you have another beast here, also provided by the Canadians, the so-called Special Purpose
Dextrous Manipulator, or SPDM.
And the Station arm could grab the end of this SPDM, and then the SPDM itself was equipped with a few special arms, which allowed it to perform very precise tasks.
Obviously, the end effector of the SSRMS could not do a very precise task, but adding to it the SPDM would allow the performance of a detailed or precise task.
Again, on the subject of the end effector grapple fixture, you have here, obviously, the end effector of the SSRMS.
You see the feature allowing the anchoring of the end of the arm attached to structure, and in this picture, it's going towards a grapple fixture.
Here, this is probably the grapple fixture of the SPDM.
And you have a camera here, looking at the target, which is very close to the grapple fixture of the target, and you are guided, as the arm operator's doing this manually, this is not an automatic operation, but you do this manually-- you are guided by the view from the camera, to give you cues about the proper orientation of the end effector versus grapple fixture, and also the distance.
All of these cues are visible on the picture that you have on monitor, or on several monitors.
Of course, there's a lot of training behind that, but it works fine.
It has been very reliable.
For the control of the arm, you select the mode, the mode of operation.
For instance, you have the end effector mode, where you control the arm as if you were sitting at the end of the arm, looking in the direction of the axis of the cylinder of the end effector.
This is a mode that is used if you do a capture of a free-flying target, for instance, and as mentioned before, you have a rotation hand controller for the control of the arm, and a translation hand controller, exactly the same features as you have for the control of the Shuttle itself.
And here you have the coordinate system attached to the end effector of the SSRMS.
You can imagine, if you push towards <i>x</i>, or you push on the little button of the translation hand controller, then you are going to move the arm in the <i>x</i> direction.
If you look at the target using a camera, here, then it's something that is very intuitive: you're going to be moving towards the grapple fixture of the target. and if you want to do a <i>y</i>-translation, you move the translation hand controller in this direction, then you are going to have a motion of the arm in this particular direction.
Which, again, is going to be perfectly intuitive.
And the same for the rotations.
They have to be intuitive, you have to choose a mode so that you can accomplish the planned task, on one hand; on the other hand, it has to be quite intuitive.
Well, we had, before, the two teams spacewalking, and now we have the two Mikes.
Mike Fincke on the right hand side, and Mike Foale on the left-hand side, watching.
Mike Fincke is at the control station for the Space Station robotic arm, and as mentioned before, he has on his right hand the rotation hand controller for the arm, on his left hand, the translation hand controller.
And he has a special computer dedicated to the operation of the arm, with a special display, and he has also different monitors showing views from different cameras.
But that's the way the SSRMS is still being operated.
For the Shuttle, it was similar, in terms of rotation hand controller and translation hand controller.
Of course, we had a direct view out of the aft windows of the flight deck, of the operation of the arm, because the anchor point of the arm, or the shoulder, was very close, finally, to the forward portion of the payload bay, and close to the position itself of the robotic arm operator.
In a way, it was easier for the Shuttle, because we had a direct view.
In the case of the Station, before the Cupola was installed, there was never a direct view, and now, with the Cupola installed, there's at least a partial view of the arm, seen from the Cupola, where a very similar station as the one we see here is installed now in the cupola.
Well, this is a view of Stephen Robinson, a NASA astronaut, riding the Canadarm 2 on the small platform at the end of the arm.
Quite a nice view, showing the end part of the Space Station robotic arm, or Canadarm 2, and Stephen Robinson with a beautiful view of the background.
Now, this is in a way a symbolic picture, showing that, as well, robotics and spacewalking has been used extensively for the Space Station assembly and for the Space Station maintenance, and the combination of the two has been an absolutely essential tool for Hubble, and for the International Space Station.
