Hello, everyone.
In this video, let's address the subject of suborbital spaceflight, which nowadays is performed mainly by commercial companies.
The definition of a suborbital spaceflight, it's a flight in which the spacecraft reaches space, which is more than 100 kilometers altitude in the case of the Earth.
This is the so-called Kármán line, the boundary between aeronautics below 100 kilometers and astronautics above 100 kilometers.
If you go above 100 kilometers, you have gone into space.
And the case of suborbital, the trajectory of the spacecraft intersects the atmosphere or the surface of the body from which it was launched.
So it does not even complete one orbit.
Obviously, you can do a suborbital flight from the Moon, just hopping up, reaching a certain altitude, and then coming back down, because there's no atmosphere, there's no boundary of space, like is the case for the Earth or any planet for that matter which has an atmosphere.
And let's look at the profile on the left-hand side.
The spacecraft is either taking off by its own means -- we'll see some examples later-- or carried to a certain altitude within the atmosphere by a carrier aircraft.
Then it fires a rocket engine and goes up nearly vertically.
A little bit shy of the 100 kilometers boundary, we have a cut-off of the engine.
And then, this part of the trajectory is nearly parabolic.
In fact, it's elliptic trajectory with the center of the Earth being at one of the focus, but it is nearly parabolic.
Then, there is typically a few minutes of weightlessness.
So the spacecraft is just on free-fall.
It comes down back in the atmosphere.
Then, of course, there is the critical phase of the re-entry in the denser layers of the atmosphere, which has to be solved by the manufacturer of the spaceplane.
We'll talk about that later.
Typically, you have relatively high
G-forces when you come back, of the order of 4Gs.
And then the flight ends up with gliding, normally without any engine, to a runway-- and landing on the runway.
This is suborbital spaceflight.
Well, in the U.S. the first manned, or with humans on board suborbital flights were the first spaceflight of Americans in space that was following the flight of Gagarin in April, 1961.
In the U.S. we had Al Shepard, who did the first spaceflight going with a Redstone rocket, which you see on the left-hand side, on a suborbital flight reaching an altitude of a little above 100 kilometers.
This is Redstone 3--
Redstone being the name of the rocket-- and Redstone 4 was with Gus Grissom, whom you see on the right-hand side.
Also a suborbital flight.
And these were the first spaceflights of Americans.
A few years later,
NASA developed a very fast aircraft, the X-15, which reached a very high speed of about Mach 7, seven times the speed of sound.
And on two occasions, with the pilot, Joseph Walker, it reached space, an altitude of more than 100 kilometers.
And you see this very fast plane with a rocket engine in the back.
And it had a fuel tank, and an oxidizer tank.
And it had also attitude rockets or reaction control system also in the nose of the fuselage.
Because in very high layers of the atmosphere, the air surfaces didn't work, couldn't change the orientation of this aircraft.
And an attitude control system, like a spaceship, had to be used.
It's a very remarkable project; to think that in the 60s, they already reached these very high velocities in space in an aircraft is quite remarkable.
And there was a lot of lessons learned about control of a spacecraft at very, very high altitudes, typically what a spacecraft has to go through when it comes back from a spaceflight on orbit.
So, very useful data for future space programs run by NASA.
Well, back to commercial companies attempting and realizing successfully suborbital spaceflight.
We had the Ansari X Prize, which consisted in going to space above 100 kilometers on two occasions within two weeks.
That was the goal and the target of this Ansari X Prize, which was won by SpaceShip One in 2004, designed and built by Scaled Composites, a company in California.
And you see here the SpaceShip One carried in the bottom of a carrier aircraft that was brought to a certain altitude, and then it was detached firing the rocket engine, which you see here in the middle picture.
Then going, like the profile was shown on the previous slide, to about 60-70 kilometers, shutting down the engine and then coming over the boundary of 100 kilometers, then coming down.
It's interesting to see this, on the lower right, the geometry of the spacecraft,
SpaceShip One, as it was going up into space, and also the configuration that we had for landing.
But for the re-entry in the atmosphere, after having reached the peak altitude of 100 kilometers, the geometry of the spaceship had to be modified, as is depicted here in order to remain stable during the re-entry in the atmosphere, and also provide enough drag in the high layers of the atmosphere.
So, from a technical point of view and a design point of view, that was quite a challenge to provide this change in the geometry for the re-entry in the atmosphere.
Quite a successful program.
And this team won the Ansari X Prize in 2004.
The company Virgin Galactic and Richard Branson became involved in this successful project with the idea of developing another spaceplane,
SpaceShip Two, which was going to be pretty similar to SpaceShip One, but with more room inside in order to carry passengers to space, to the boundary of 100 kilometers and beyond.
So the SpaceShip Two was designed and built, and there was a new carrier aircraft, a so-called "White Knight", a carrier aircraft with four jet engines.
There were a few test flights performed with the SpaceShip Two.
Unfortunately, it was lost in an accident in October, 2014.
Virgin Galactic and the team that had built the aircraft and tested it decided to build another SpaceShip Two, the VSS Unity, which was rolled out recently in February, 2016, in California, and will be used again to carry passengers to the boundary of space in a few months from now, possibly at the end of 2016 or in 2017.
There's a similar effort pursued by the company XCOR in the United States, with a Lynx spaceplane, with a difference that this time the idea is to reach space more than 100 kilometers, but on a spaceplane that takes off on a runway.
We don't need a carrier aircraft.
So then it rises to a high altitude, shuts down the engine, goes about 100, and then comes back, and lands on the runway.
The difference is that unlike the SpaceShip Two of Virgin Galactic, we only have a two-seat cabin for the pilot and a passenger or co-pilot.
We have the LOX tank, and the fuel tanker here, and the rocket engine in the back.
And again, takeoff from the runway and landing on the runway without carrier aircraft.
This is the flight profile of the Lynx Mk II spaceplane.
And as mentioned, takeoff on the runway, powered assent with a maximum of about three times the speed of sound, engine off to about 60 kilometers, reaching the boundary of space only a bit above 100 kilometers, re-entering the atmosphere.
G-forces during the re-entry will be about 4G.
Then there's a glide and circle, and land on a runway without an engine.
Another concept for reaching suborbital space, but this time, with a completely different approach.
We don't have a spaceplane any more, no taking off from a runway and landing on a runway.
But it's a rocket-carrying a capsule with up to four people, pretty much on the vertical and shutting down the engine at a certain altitude, so that the capsule reaches space more than 100 kilometers.
There are large windows.
And the occupants of the capsule will have a beautiful view of the Earth, and the blackness of the sky, and weightlessness for a few minutes.
Like was the case for the other two that I presented before,
SpaceShip Two and the Lynx spacecraft.
And then, what is interesting is that the rocket comes back down pretty much on the same vertical and is recovered.
It's landing on a platform.
And the capsule, after reaching the maximum altitude will come down, re-enter the atmosphere with some G-forces, obviously, and will be parachuted down to the surface of the Earth.
There were two successful test flights in 2015, including one in November, 2015, where the rocket was recovered.
It had a four-leg structure, so that it landed back on the platform where it was recovered.
Quite an interesting approach.
Several other companies are involved in suborbital flights and spaceplane development.
Here we see a development by 
Airbus Defence and Space Company.
It pretty much looks like a business jet with two turbo-jet engines but a rocket engine in the back.
So it will use the first two, the turbo-jet engines, to go to a certain altitude, then will fire the rocket engine to go up to the boundary of space.
As you see, it's a canard configuration; the horizontal stabilizer in the front, and the wing is in the back.
I don't have too many details on this one, but just to indicate that several other companies beyond this one and the one that I mentioned, are looking to the possibility of reaching the boundaries of space above 100 kilometers.
And most of these companies think of the future, not only carry passengers to the boundaries of space but to carry payload also, and allow the performance of scientific experiments in the zero-G environment for a few minutes.
And some are even thinking of the idea of doing point-to-point suborbital flight on the surface of the Earth, going from London to Sydney in about 40 minutes on a suborbital trajectory.
I think the future will be very rich in such endeavors.
