The future of human
Solar System exploration.
Of course, we left the low Earth orbit already in the 60s, and visited the Moon on six occasions in the frame of the Apollo program during the 60s and the early 70s.
This was a wonderful program, certainly a highlight of human space exploration.
We have had a number of rovers on the surface, we had several from Russia, we had one from China, we had a number of spacecraft orbiting our satellite: the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, we had the SMART-1.
We know quite a lot about the Moon already.
It's our neighbor, it's been very inspiring for artists, for poets, for philosophers.
It's still there to be visited, to be explored, and to be exploited.
ESA's Moon village.
This is an idea proposed by the new Director General of ESA,
Johann-Dietrich Woerner.
The idea is really to do Moon exploration by humans and robots starting in the mid-20s.
It's generating a lot of excitement at the European Space Agency among engineers and mission planners and at the European
Astronaut Center in Cologne, where some of the current astronauts and future astronauts that will be recruited in the near future have the possibility of walking on the Moon, and maybe going beyond the Moon.
The idea is not only to visit the Moon and explore the Moon but also try to use its resources.
Mining activities are very dirty and polluting on the surface of the Earth, mainly because of water and atmosphere, and there are certainly elements that we could someday take from the Moon, whether it's Helium-3 or other minerals that we could exploit from the Moon and bring them back to Earth.
Again, the Moon is very close,
400,000 kilometers.
It takes two and a half days to go there, two and a half days to come back.
The depth of the gravitational well of the Moon is very shallow, so going back from the Moon in direction of the Earth uses very little energy, so I'm convinced that someday, we will use and exploit the Moon's resources.
Beyond the Moon, it's certainly a possibility.
But the planets in the Solar System,
Mars and beyond Mars are quite far away, and the idea is to go progressively back to the Moon.
This is certainly an objective of ESA, and NASA is also considering that, and other space agencies as well.
Beyond the Moon, we have asteroids.
We have a lot of asteroids in the Solar System, most of them are between Mars and Jupiter, but several of these are so-called NEOs, near-Earth objects that have orbits that cross the orbit of the Earth periodically.
There's certainly the possibility of beyond the Moon, going to asteroids.
In fact, there's a plan for redirecting an asteroid by a robotic mission, bring it in the vicinity of the Earth, maybe on orbit around the Moon, or maybe on one of the Lagrange points,
L1 or L2 of the Earth-Moon system, and then visit this asteroid that has been brought robotically by human spacecraft, typically Orion.
Here, you see an artist's view of two Orion spacecraft in the vicinity of an asteroid with an astronaut visiting this big chunk of a rock in the Solar System.
We could someday less, I would say, research asteroids and do exploration, but exploit the capabilities of asteroids in providing minerals for the Earth.
Human settlement on an asteroid, this is not really a planned mission, but this is a possibility, at some point, we may settle there.
The problem is that living from the land on an asteroid is kind of difficult.
If you want to get oxygen and food on an asteroid it's going to be hard, it's going to be easier on Mars, but hard on an asteroid, but this is a possibility still.
The advantage of an asteroid is that they are much closer than any planet in the Solar System, further away than the Moon but closer than Mars.
Planet Mars is a logical step beyond the Moon and asteroids.
A really very attractive planet, a beautiful red color, maybe was harboring life in the past, we are doing a lot of research in this direction.
It has a rotation period on itself, which is pretty similar to the rotation period of the Earth.
It's close to one day.
It's called one sol.
It's close to 24 hours.
It also has a tilt in its rotation axis, such that you have seasons on Mars.
It has a lot of similarities to the Earth, one of the big differences, of course, is that it has a very thin atmosphere, mainly carbon dioxide atmosphere, and the pressure on the surface about one hundredth of the atmospheric pressure at sea level on Earth.
Human settlement on Mars.
So, first of all, you need to go there, and it takes a long time.
Typically, seven to eight months if you want to go on a Hohmann transfer trajectory from the Earth to the Red Planet.
Maybe shorter time if you have an advanced propulsion system, like the VASIMR propulsion system or maybe a nuclear propulsion system.
Anyways, human settlement on Mars is certainly possible in a few decades from now.
In fact, NASA plans a visit to Mars in the mid-30s of this century.
The problem with life on Mars or even any long journey in the Solar System is radiation.
Radiation coming from the Sun, in the form of particles of the solar wind or radiation coming from the galaxy, cosmic particle, high energy particle, even pretty high atomic mass nuclei that penetrate [all] living organisms and equipments.
You don't the protection on Mars that you have on the Earth with the geomagnetic field deflecting the cosmic particles so that they don't reach the region of the lower atmosphere on the Earth's surface, at least not in the equatorial and mid-latitude region; a little more in the Poles, because of the geometry of the magnetic field.
On Mars, you don't have any of that, so you have direct hits from cosmic particles.
It's obvious that if crew members want to stay a reasonably long time on the surface of Mars, they need to have habitation that is protecting them from cosmic particles, either underground or, as we can see here on this artist's view, some kind of a construction, where inside you are protected against the cosmic particles.
Thin atmosphere is mentioned, so if you want to go out, you need to wear your spacesuits, but the atmosphere being carbon dioxide, you can extract oxygen from the carbon dioxide, and you have plenty of oxygen on Mars, you just have to chemically extract it from the atmosphere.
Human settlement on Mars is very likely before the middle of this century.
It's unlikely that we have large colonies on Mars, but at least explorers, and people who are going to go there to understand more about the Red Planet, and possibly exploit its resources also.
Beyond Mars, you have a number of really interesting objects in the Solar System that will lend themselves to first robotic exploration, but also possibly someday to human exploration.
One of the satellites of Jupiter,
Europa is covered with ice, and it has been determined that, below this layer of ice, there's an ocean, there's liquid water, and obviously if we see liquid water, we see the possibility of the development of life, even in a very primitive form.
So Europa is a really interesting object ready for exploration, robotic and human in the near future.
Other highlights in the Solar System beyond Jupiter and its satellites, including Europa, you have some really interesting satellites, in particular two satellites of Saturn,
Titan on one hand, the largest satellite of Saturn, which has an atmosphere, and has also ammonia, methane on the surface, possibly liquid lakes of ammonia, methane on the surface.
Certainly, you have the basic elements for the fabrication of life on Titan.
Really interesting object, you have Enceladus, which is similar in its structure to Europa, which we talked about before, covered with solid ice, and possibly ocean, liquid ocean below this crust of ice.
So other targets for robotic exploration, and much later, possibly human exploration.
