My name is Harry van Hulten,
I'm currently the Director of Flight Test Operations at XCOR Aerospace in Mojave, California.
XCOR Aerospace is still considered a startup company in the commercial space industry.
The core technology that we develop is new rocket propulsion, engines, propulsion systems, and in addition to that we develop a suborbital, reusable, commercial vehicle, and hopefully, put that into flight test operations soon.
The specifications of the Lynx spacecraft it's going to be used for suborbital operations, so the goal is to reach
100 kilometers or 300,000 feet per flight.
It seats two people, so it'll be the pilot on the left, and a spaceflight participant on the right, whether there is a space tourist or a mission specialist executing a specific mission, it's up to the client.
The Lynx is propelled by four, newly developed rocket engines by XCOR Aerospace.
These are reignitable and reusable, they are designed to last for 5,000 flights.
And the Lynx is going to operate from a regular runway, so with that, we will bring the space a lot closer to a lot of people on this planet.
Well, the most important feature of the Lynx, first of all, is propulsion.
It's reusable, reignitable rocket technology, so the engines are developed to be reused for about 5,000 flights; it's the design criteria.
And we made them reignitable, so we can start the engines, stop the engines, start them.
There is four of them, that propel the Lynx, and by the fact that they are reusable and reignitable, it starts to look like aircraft-type operations, or commercial aircraft-type operations.
So that is the first big innovation; second big innovation is, we are going to take off on land, on a regular runway, so we are going to use a currently regular airfield, if you will.
Obviously, we need specific licenses to do commercial space operations, so we'll turn it literally into a spaceport.
But it doesn't require extra infrastructure for the location itself.
And we are going to fly into commercial suborbital space, up to four times a day, so that is, I think, the most innovation step we'll bring to the table by the Lynx.
For which purpose?
What I think it's a strength that we have a multi-mission ship-- as we call it-- so it can fly suborbital payloads and people, people meaning special participants whether those are commercial tourists or a mission specialist executing a scientific mission it's up to the client.
We also have room in the back of the fuselage where we can take sensors with us, that we can either retain for the whole flight or expand with the spring system during the weightless phase.
And those sensors then make their own way back to Earth by a parachute or a balloon, and they follow on development: is to develop a cargo, or payload bay on top of the fuselage, where we can house larger systems, and those systems can weigh up to 650 kilograms, and it could either be a telescope that we use while we're outside of the atmosphere or ultimately we could launch small satellites.
For that now, that part, to go on the dorsal of the fuselage will require probably some extra modifications, so we'll call that the next version of the Lynx.
And instead of the passenger on the right seat in the cockpit, we can exchange it for a full scientific module up to 120 kilos to do scientific research experiments.
And in addition to that, behind the pilot's seat, we have another smaller payload bay it's about a shoe box size in volume up to 20 kilos in weight that we can take for pretty much any flight, any experiment or any payload.
The mission profile of a typical flight.
I said we take off from a regular runway, so for Flight Test Operations that will be Mojave, for early operations will be
Mojave here in California; after take off, we'll start a steep climb, and that climb will ultimately result in almost a vertical climb profile.
We'll be accelerating under our own power, quickly.
We'll go supersonic in about a minute or two; and after three, three and a half minutes we're already outside of the atmosphere.
And we'll have the main engine cutoff around 190,000 feet.
From there on, we'll start a weightless phase that lasts about 4-5 minutes.
In the middle of the weightless phase, we'll hit the highest point; normally, that should be about 103 kilometers, or 330, 000 feet.
And after that weightless phase is complete, we'll do a re-entry, pretty similar to X-15, at the end of the 60's, early 70's.
We have small, steering rockets by which we can accurately control the altitude of the spaceship, thereby we can control our re-entry in conjunction with the aerodynamic controls.
Re-entry will last about 30-45 seconds where we will probably will endure up to 4 Gs, so the G is coming above.
We will also be decelerated so we call that a negative Gx; so that combination will last for about 30-40 seconds.
And after that, it's going to be a glide flight back to where we took off from, and all in all should be about
45-60 minutes flight.
No, we have, I would say, a pretty small cockpit, it's roomier than an F-16 for example, that I've been used to fly in, but it's definitely not large enough to unbuckle and start doing somersaults or other stuff that you can do on a zero-G flight for example.
But I think the experience itself, the fact that you are weightless, you will not feel that you are still buckled up, you don't feel that you are still in the seat, and that you float with the ship and all, and we have the canopy around us, so it allows for a great view.
So we don't have to sort through a small porthole and peek outside;
I mean the whole canopy front, right, left, and all above is available, right there, in front of us.
So, we will stay in our seats, we don't feel it, and with that, I think, the zero-G, or the micro-gravity experience will not be anything less in comparison to the ones that we advertized for a zero-G training.
What are the characteristics of the spaceports?
Well, the cool thing for us is, they don't have to look like anything else than a normal airport.
All we need to do is make sure that we meet the bureaucratic challenges, as far as licenses and stuff.
We will have to live with a lot of the ITAR restrictions, so that it'll encourage, probably, security restrictions, but that's stuff that you see regularly on the airports as well.
Other than that, all we need is a runway that is sufficient long enough, and airspace right on top of that airfield that we need to use for our vertical climb and descent profile, or almost vertical.
So, with that, literally, any, let's say, larger airport, for us, we can turn that into a spaceport.
We have a very small logistical footprint, so we need very little of the things that are already at any airport.
So any airport could be a spaceport, in our vision.
So, currently, Mojave, Curacao, we'll fly out of Midland, in Texas, where part of out company is located, we have encampments out in Florida, the Shuttle landing facility, so that will probably-- those are going to be our future locations where we operate from, or we'll have a part of company based at.
Other than that, we have a very flexible concept, where we can easily transport the spaceship in any commercial strategic transport aircraft like a Boeing-747 freight, for example, where the nose can be opened, or any similar aircraft; we can easily fit the Lynx inside, support equipments, support personnel, and operating personnel, we'll fly to whatever our location is where we need to operate from, unload it, do our operations, ready to go, back in and back up, come back to one of our own locations.
So, we'll have a very flexible way of coming out to our clients and do the operations required.
Well, that is a big step in the future, I think.
Currently, Lynx is not suitable to go far down range, if we call it like that, or do point-to-point transportation, but you can compare to, let's say, the very early flights in aviation, where we proved to the public that flying was safe, and that if the scenic flights, just the famous ones are the ones with KLM, that the first two years of its operations mainly get the scenic flights around Amsterdam, 15-20 minutes because that was all the airplanes could do at the time, but soon thereafter, they had the first services to Germany, to Denmark, France, the UK, Switzerland, and from there on, in less than in 100 years, we can fly to any destination of this planet, so it can hopefully develop pretty quickly into an important operation.
But currently, with Lynx, we are not there.
That's a great question.
Hopefully, in the future, as we get into the normal pace of operations with Lynx, we will develop a training plan, both for the participants and for the pilots.
Currently, we don't look far beyond developmental testing, so that requires a conventional test pilot school education preferably one of four military schools in the West, or the National Test Pilot School here in the US could be another good example.
And also, let's say, comparable or experience on comparable high performance aircraft or systems.
So that is a small combination for developmental testing.
Ultimately, where we are going, well, that's a good question.
We'll have to see what is required to fly the Lynx, and it could be very similar to the standard today development of commercial aviation into a separate educational track for the future commercial space pilots.
For the spaceflight participants, we have already developed a training plan, we provide several trainings for our customers, both in simulators, and the real aircraft.
We have experience with that since 2012, we do 3 training programs in the Netherlands, and currently
2 training programs in the US, and we are hopefully going to expand that and we do some other programs in addition, like given the opportunity to do zero-G flights on ESA's or, let's say, the European zero-G airplane, and some other that are similar, so we are already training our crew members, if you will, mainly the guys in the right seat, and hopefully we'll firm up plans by the time we complete developmental testing for the pilots side.
Selection of the participants: we're currently selling tickets so that means that if you buy a ticket, or you win a ticket, because we sell to individuals, but also to organizations who would like to buy more tickets and then hand them out, let's say, winners of a specific campaign or so, like we have done in the past with the Axe Apollo group and that Phillips is doing as we speak.
If you then get a ticket, then we have a medical protocol, or a medical check for you.
Nothing fancy, but we have to address certain points just to make sure that we avoid certain risks that are associated with the flight, that has to do with the combination of the zero-G and positive Gs, but typically, anyone who is in good health has nothing to fear, and they will have no problem.
And after that, we require you to participate in one or two training programs that we advertize and if you completed that, then you are ready to go.
That is really up to the scientists,
I mean, we provide, let's say, micro-gravity time, or situation of our flights, so on our prototype, that it'll be a little shorter than 4-5 minutes to what is offered on the mark two, which we will go to 100 km, prototype mark one, and we'll be open for this type of operations if we are done with the flight test program, but the maximum that we currently think this vehicle will fly to is 200,000 feet, so a little shorter in micro-gravity time, but really the experiment needs to meet all the safety criteria that we are developing right now, in conjunction with the AFA.
But other than that, we don't limit anyone into designing an experiment and fly on board with Lynx.
So, I can name a couple of examples where people are developing their scientific experiments for right now, but I certainly don't want to limit people in their thinking.
We are open for life sciences, we are open for microgravity research, for all kind of other applications.
A very interesting project is being developed by one of our national Physics Institute to do fundamental physics research into water, and they've developed this fascinating project where, if you have two beakers of water and you apply a large voltage differential a small--we call it the floating water bridge-- will form between the two beakers, up to three centimeters.
It's a fascinating thing to see, and they want to do more research especially, under microgravity conditions, in order to explain that phenomenon.
And that's to do with the dynamic behavior of water.
And it could, hopefully, ultimately, result in an explanation of why energy can be stored in water; that we know from a thunderstorm that's just a body of water that has a lot of energy stored in it-- we can't control it, but it's got a lot of electrical energy-- and hopefully, with this experiment we learn how that phenomenon comes about, and perhaps, in the future, allows us to control it.
And also to store data in water, so it's mind boggling just to be able to contribute to science with an experiment like that.
Other offer that we can easily do is high altitude research.
Come up with real data, measurements, on the higher atmosphere; currently , air balloons do a lot of that, but they don't go much higher that 20 kilometers, where then they burst.
And we'll do anything above up to 100 kilometers on a daily basis, and on several and various locations.
Other things we are doing, people are developing telescopes to do interplanetary research in the future, or Earth observation, and we are open for business, so we will, hopefully, see some exciting experiments in the future.
What is important is, first of all, thanks of the great questions on the scientific experiments, because, I think, there is sometimes the perception that what we are doing is just for the happy few and just for fun; what I'd like to point out, is, what we are doing is very serious.
And we are opening a new world to the people, that is there to use by the people.
And this new world is outside of our atmosphere.
We think that the importance of space applications in the future will only increase.
Right now, we are fully dependent on applications like communications,
Internet,
GPS signals for navigation purposes, and all these signals come to us from satellites, or from space, if you will.
A lot of the knowledge that we have gained on climate change comes from sensors that we based in space.
So if we start to learn, to live, and work more, in space,
I think, we open a new world that could offer a lot of answers to our questions, offer a lot of facilities to our needs, and probably more than we can imagine at this time.
So, I think it's of great importance that we really start to look outside of the atmosphere, perhaps for point-to-point travel like you mentioned-- you know, just the ISS is a great example-- it's circumnavigating Earth in an hour and a half, and that is mind-boggling.
A few people realize that we already have the technology to, if you get there, reach any destination on this planet, within an hour and a half;
I'm really convinced that our children will go for lunch in Australia, and will be home for dinner.
Use less energy to get there, and it's better for the environment, so that's really what we need to do; improve ways of living and working in space in order to improve our chances for survival on this planet.
Right, that's a great question.
I think, as a kid,
I've always been fascinated by aviation and space.
Seeing airplanes fly, as a kid, and imagine that I could be on board some day was inspiring as a kid, so, in a way, one of my dreams came true when I was allowed to join the air force, and ultimately, flew F-16s for almost 20 years.
But I've always also been inspired by the folks that kept pushing out the borders, and went out of the atmosphere, went, you know into space, even to the Moon.
And it's just mind-boggling that we do have the capabilities and the knowledge to get there, but we get there, just, let's say, on a very small scale.
So I was flying out of the Edwards Airforce Base, in 2004-2006, where we did flight tests on F-16s.
With the Netherlands airforce that I used to fly in.
And then, right next door, in Mojave, was where the XPrize was won, in 2004, so that showed me that a regular company, let's say people that were as smart as we were, or perhaps a little smarter, but not from a different background, just flew to space on September 29 and October 4, 2004 with a privately developed spaceship.
So that really got my interest, and I saw this emerging space industry with Richard Branson as one of the entrepreneurs brave enough to start an enterprise there; and he started to be followed by a lot of other companies that are doing magnificent things, and XCOR is just one small company in that new, commercial space industry.
So, I'm extremely happy that I can use all the knowledge and experience that I was allowed to gain in the airforce and now help XCOR make its mark in the commercial space industry, and open new ways for mankind.
So, that's kind of how I've got inspired and how I got here, and it's always difficult for, I think, Europeans, to get access to a space program.
ESA is a fantastic organization, but there are only a few people that are actually making it into the ISS or a space program.
A little better maybe organized, and better opportunities for the people is here in the United States, and maybe also in Russia, but still, I think, we should bring space closer to people.
