In this lesson I will introduce the second PVD technique that is called sputtering, and which allows for a whole variety of thin film materials to be deposited.
In fact many more than thermal evaporation.
I will first show some basic principal how plasma is created for our purposes show the different plasma zones in the sputter chamber, and how to optimize it for efficient sputtering and also introduce the Paschen law.
The goal of the sputter process is to remove physical material from the target and deliver it to the substrate a wafer.
This is done by ion bombardment in the plasma.
Ions that hit the target with sufficient energy eject atoms from the target.
These atoms are then deposited as a thin film on the wafer placed adjacent to the target.
So how is this done exactly?
Let's have a look.
First the air is pumped out of the chamber to create a vacuum.
Shown here, this is the chamber with the vacuum pump that evacuates this are from air.
That chamber is then filled with Argon, an inert gas until the pressure reaches values in the order of a couple of hundreds of milliliter.
A plasma is then created by applying the high voltage of about 1500V between two electrodes, shown here.
The positive Argon ions in blue are accelerated towards the cathode which is the negatively charged electrode and hits the target here, so the target, in this case we choose Gold as a material and here's the wafer on which we want to deposit the gold.
The target is in fact made of the material that we want to deposit, and it's mounted directly onto the cathode.
With the impact energy, atoms are ejected from the target, here in yellow travel through the plasma, and finally deposit on the wafer as a thin film.
Sputtering allows all kinds of materials including metals, compounds as well as refractory materials.
The deposited thin film has a generally good adhesion and excellent step coverage.
We will come to these details later in this lecture.
Let's have a short look what plasma is and how it works for out purpose here.
Plasma is defined as partially ionized gas that is neutral, and thus has the same number of ions and electrons.
It is commonly also referred to as the fourth state of matter.
By the way, plasma is also used for dry etching processes that my colleague Martin Gijs will cover in detail in his corresponding lesson.
The simplest form of plasma for out purposes, the DC plasma it is created as follows.
First, the chamber is pumped down and filled with Argon gas to reach at the position, pressure in the order of 10 to 100 mTorr.
Shown here, some Argon atoms in the chamber.
Second, a DC voltage can be applied between these two electrodes shown here.
With the terminal resistance, and here the potential that can be applied to the cathode and the anode.
At low voltages, the only measurable current comes from so called
"background ionization".
Which is always present, but often negligible. 
The region of this background ionization comes, for example from a photon that hits one of the Argon atoms and ionizes it.
The result of this ionization is that we get an electron and an Argon ion.
This current is very low, and the voltage on the electrodes is about the same as the voltage of the source as there's nearly no voltage drop over Rs.
If you increase the voltage, the current first remains constant since the voltage does not effect the background ionization.
We can draw here a typical curve how this current increases if you increase the potential between the electrodes.
The slight increase, but not very drastic because it's only based on the available ions due to the background ionization.
When the voltage is further increased over 600V approaching 1kV, depending on the gas and the pressure electrons and ions resulting from the background ionization gain enough energy to ionize other atoms.
So this electron, for instance, can ionize  this Argon atom which would release another atom, and be able to release another
Argon ion.
As a result the current increases exponentially with the voltage. 
So, now we're increasing the current drastically for the given voltage.
The regime described here is called
"Dark discharge" as no light is generated.
It is not used for micro fabrication applications as plasma in this regime is not energetic nor stable.
When the electric field between the two electrodes is further increased, breakdown of the gas occurs.
The medium becomes ionized, and an avalanche of inelastic collisions between electrons and ions appear.
So now, even argon atoms that have not been ionized by the background radiation, can be ionized by the strong electric field between the two, cathode and anode.
So, one can create here electrons, and here Argon ions with all available Argon atoms in the chamber.
And this is creating an avalanche effect, because they can then ionize other Argon atoms that are available.
That means we suddenly have a very strong current that can be installed between the cathode and the anode.
So, this is also shown here in the curve, where we now get a very strong current, up to a couple of hundred milliamperes but with the drop in the voltage.
Indeed, as the current increases the voltage drop in the source resistance becomes very important.
When Argon ions collide on the cathode secondary electrons are ejected and sustain the plasma.
Without these electrons,
 the plasma would rapidly vanish.
Finally, the plasma reaches a steady state and the loss and gain of electrons is equal.
In this regime electrons have enough energy to excite atoms to an energy level where they emit light when they are relaxed to a lower energy level.
The plasma is luminous, and this regime is called "Glow discharge".
This regime plasma is stable and energetic enough to be used in micro fabrication technology ideal for sputtering or for etching.
Typically to achieve this regime, a voltage of about 1.5kV is applied between electrodes separated by 15cm which results in the electric field in the order of 100V/cm.
In this photograph we can see the glow of plasma in one of out sputter equipment.
We will see more of this later when we go and see how the equipment looks like.
Electrons and ions don't have the same mass.
Electrons are lighter and thus have a higher mobility than an accelerated field gradient.
As a result, in a plasma ions and electrons don't move at the same speed which creates positively and negatively charged areas.
Consequently,  electric field is not constant along the plasma and the electron energy varies and creates the bright and dark areas, as shown here this light on the upper right side.
And we have the plasma chamber with the cathode and the anode in different zones in the plasma due to the different mobility of ions and electrons.
For more details about plasma zones please have a look at the accompanying documents.
Bright areas are called glow, and dark areas are called dark space.
In the practical setup for sputtering or etching the distance between the two electrodes is rather small.
In the order of 15cm, as we have seen before.
This is the showing of the chamber, the cathode and the anode and the plasma in between.
As a result, the anode, which is the positive electrode is placed in the negative glow.
Therefore, the plasma column can be simplified from here to here and only the cathode dark space the negative glow and the anode dark space subsists.
Negative glow, cathode dark space, and the anode dark space.
The potential changes very abruptly close to the electrodes in the plasma sheets and it's constant in the glow region of the plasma.
As shown here.
There is a very steep slope of the potential difference of the cathode into the plasma vacuum then the plateau where's the glow area and here again a steep slope, and the approach to the anode.
And these are the two plasma sheets.
The origin of this plasma sheet has realized the computation of the potential, along the plasma is studied in more details in the chapter about dry etching.
The required voltage to initiate the break down of the gas and create the plasma, depends on three main parameters.
Which are the pressure, the inter-electrode distance and some gas properties.
This was firs observed by
Paschen who found out that the breakdown voltage could be plotted as a function of the product between the pressure and the inter-electrode distance.
It results in an asymmetric parabola with a minimum at a specific Pd product, like shown here.
Here we have a typical curve, for an example gas like Argon every plot, the breakdown voltage, and the plasma is breaking down as the function of the product of the pressure and the distance.
Paschen has found that this curve in fact can be expressed by an equation that is shown here which gives the breakdown voltage as a function of parameters like for example, the pressure and the electrode distance as we already know, times an empirical constant which is observed experiment, and then as a function of the secondary electron emission coefficient at the cathode which plays an important role.
Here, three example gases with the breakdown voltage for a given value of pressure and distance.
On the left side of the curve minimum, one needs a higher voltage to reach breakdown because there are less molecules between the electrodes available for the reaction.
As a result, when the gas, atom, or a gas molecule is ionized free electrons reach the anode without colliding with other gas molecules, and they are lost.
For the breakdown of the gas to occur, higher voltages have to be applied in order to increase the number of free electrons and thus the probability of collisions with other molecules.
However, on the right side of the minimum of this curve we have another exact for the breakdown voltage to increase again.
Now, due to the large number of gas molecules between the electrodes, electron molecule collisions become more frequent and electrons mean free path becomes shorter.
As a result, electrons don't gain enough kinetic energy to ionize other gas molecules when colliding with them, unless the higher potential is applied.
For reach gas, the minimum breakdown voltage and the corresponding Pd product is different.
These values depend on the gas molecules, mean free path the ionization potential and the speed that the gas molecules can recapture electrons after they have been ionized.
Numerical values for the most common gases are given in the table here at the bottom, right of the slide but values for many other gases can be found in the reference book.
For sputtering, it's not always favorable to work at the minimum breakdown voltage. Indeed, it is more important to work with lower pressures and thus with a higher breakdown voltage in order to have energetic ions striking the cathode and removing atoms that can be deposited as a thin film on the wafer.
For now we have seen some basic physical principles behind sputtering, about how to create a plasma and the Paschen's law.
For now, let's have a look at the three main implementations of sputter technique that is the DC,
RF, and Magnetron sputtering. 
