In Kenya, the protected area network is made out of parks and national reserves but also of many conservancies that are, in fact, either committee-based or private protected areas.
The Northern Rangelands Trust - NRT - is an organization that provides technical support to committee-based conservancies to help them to set up a sustainable network of conservancies throughout the country.
To this end, NRT helps committee-based conservancies to design their own ecological monitoring program according to their own needs and to what is technically and financially feasible.
For this, they will use a range of tools called wild-life comms for conservancy management monitoring systems which is a template of monitoring forms, of databases, and data analysis tests that can be adjusted according to the needs of each of the conservancies.
Within a conservancy, when they develop the ecological monitoring program, on the basis of comms, too, managers, rangers and stakeholders like the traditional chiefs, will first gather together and define a shared vision for their conservancy in terms of conservation of the nature.
Then, they determine what are the species that could provide useful information to reflect the health
of this ecosystem, and among these species that they identify they eventually choose the one that can be easily observable, that are well-known, and often encountered in order to guarantee that the rangers will gather, afterwards, enough information and reliable information in order to feed the future statistical analysis.
For instance, in the Westgate conservancy, the values that have been chosen are the buffaloes, the elephants, zebras, predators like hyenas, cheetahs and lions, as well as ostriches, warthog and several species of antelopes.
In this case, the ecological attributes to assess in to monitor these values, these species, are the evolution of the species' density over time and their distribution.
This is very useful information that helps detecting animal enemies such as new threats that will need to be controlled.
On this graph, you see that over the last three years, population of cheetahs, eland and elephants have been coming more and more to Westgate Conservancy, in spite of buffalo populations.
Now that's a good question to be analyzed by the conservancy's managers.
The indicators to measure these ecological attributes are the number of living individuals, of course, that are encountered by the rangers, but also the carcasses they may see and the indicators aiming at monitoring illegal activities and human wildlife conflict in and around the conservancy.
As means in these conservancies are limited, it's not possible to hire staff specifically dedicated to ecological monitoring, so the rangers are the ones in charge of collecting information for ecological monitoring during their patrols.
The counting will, therefore, be done on foot and by blocks.
The tool used to record the data are paper forms, which is a simple method and, therefore, very sustainable and affordable.
The data from the monitoring form fed in by the rangers are then recorded in the database and the person within the conservancy in charge of the database can extract from it all the reports showing the evolution of the population of monitored species and their distribution among the different blocks in the protected area.
And here is an example of the kind of report you can extract from the database.
And this is the map that shows the distribution of elephants throughout one year in Westgate Conservancy.
Then the analysis of monthly ecological monitoring reports allows to rethink which areas should be better controlled by future patrols to guarantee all blocks have been covered in an equitable way or to choose an intervention to reduce human-elephant conflicts in the high-risk zone, if there are any.
So these two kinds of decisions are good examples of adaptive management based on ecological monitoring results.
Thus, the comm's tools in the Kenyan conservancies shows that it's possible to implement simple and cheap ecological monitoring systems adapted to the needs of each particular conservancy and that provide relevant information for management decision making.
As the managers themselves decide what value they want to monitor and they are the ones responsible for the storage and analysis of the data throughout the year, they are taking ownership of the ecological monitoring which guarantees its sustainability over time.
