Wetlands are ecotones, areas of transition between water and land, which diverse function give them remarkable biological, ideological, economical and sociological values.
In the MOOC on protected areas management, we have seen that wetlands face many threats: drainage, industrialisation, pollution, urbanization and so on, which keep reducing their size.
According to the Ramsar Convention, waterbirds are species of birds that are ecologically dependent upon wetlands.
Here we consider waterbird species as a value of wetlands.
And we will see how their attributes ought to be monitored, especially the diversity of species, and their number of individual per species.
Waterbirds are monitored because they are indicators of the quality of wetlands.
First, according to the Ramsar Convention a wetland is considered globally important when it includes at least
1% of waterbirds populations.
1% can be a very big number of birds.
They can also be monitored because of their sustainable use for vision, tourism, or hunting, for instance.
Monitoring namely has to draw up or update wetland management plans.
Or to design sampling plans correlated with the available resources.
In this unit, we will talk about direct monitoring methods.
These methods depend on many factors, such as:
The monitored species, the size of the site, coastal accessibility, observation points given another view, the time available to carry out the count, the number of people to include, and the equipment available.
In all cases, monitoring requires experienced staff, and meticulous preparation as always in monitoring.
If possible, apply the same monitoring protocol during each site visit.
It can, however, be difficult to standardize counting protocols on sites undergoing important changes over time.
And that is particularly true for wetlands.
Frost, draught, or floods, can greatly influence the counting conditions from a year to the next.
And these factors should be considered when drawing up protocols and of course when you proceed to data analysis.
Waterbirds can be monitored directly in 3 different ways. 
One, ground counts, usually done on foot, sometimes by bicycle or by car.
Two, monitoring from a boat.
And three, aerial monitoring from a plane or a helicopter.
Of course, ground counts are the easiest and most commonly used protocol.
And also the cheapest.
You can also take photographs or films, and use these to individually count birds
 after you've done those pictures.
Or simply verify the observer's estimates.
During each visit, the site should systematically be covered on foot following an identical, predetermined route following the transect model, used by (INAUDIBLE) to identify the birds.
Identify the species, count individual of each species, determine the gender ratio for some of them when it is feasible, observe interspecific combinations, note feeding behaviors and habits, and so on.
As there can be many individuals at the same place, bird counts are often done per block.
Experienced observers can count blocks of 10, 20, 50, 100 birds or more.
Birds on the first block are generally counted one by one.
Then the mental image of the first block is carried forwards to the entire group to estimate the total number.
Most observers use blocks of 10 birds.
It can be complicated to go above that number.
A tally counter reckoning number of birds or blocks, can improve precision and avoid forgetting an individual or block, of course.
You can also use a voice recorder, or ask help from a colleague. 
Blocks of 100 birds or more are generally only applied to birds flying.
Or when the time at hand to count is very limited.
In this case it is usually easier to proceed from the back of a fleet by examining the group in its flying direction using binoculars or a telescope.
Not easy, but feasible.
Of course, on small sites, it is better to count birds one by one.
It is usually easier to count birds that are resting or feeding, standing on the ground, or on the water.
If you wish to monitor a colony of breeding birds, it is crucial to minimize the risk of disturbing them, and the observer should avoid getting too close whether on foot, by car boat or on plane.
Just to avoid disturbance.
Just like it is for all types of monitoring, aiming at detecting
(INAUDIBLE) variations, the same site should be counted season after season following the same standardized protocol.
The different methods can go from a rough estimate of a total number of breeding birds present to a total count of occupied nests.
If the colony is counted only once during breeding season, all the nests occupied by eggs or chicks should be counted.
If the count takes place monthly, only nests occupied by eggs should be counted.
As for larger colonies, proceed once more to estimates by counting in blocks.
For birds breeding on large surfaces, the total number of birds can also be estimated through quadrat sampling, for instance, and extrapolations.
In the end, good monitoring is, above all, based on the observer's quality and precision.
But of course, this is true for all types of monitoring.
