We've seen in this MOOC what ecological monitoring of protected area means.
It is the assessment of a peer value conditions.
This value is characterized by its ecological attributes, described by indicators.
All this follows a protocol that determines the sampling plan, the method that will be used, dependent on the context, on the competencies, and the means at hand.
So as a conclusion, let's keep some simple rules in mind.
Ecological monitoring must have a purpose.
And is thereby not a simple collection of information, that nobody needs, and that will pile up for nothing in the manager's office.
The purpose for the monitoring needs to be clearly defined, to be understood by the managers, executants and those to whom the results will be sent to.
Monitoring is part of the protected area's management.
Particularly during the preparation of the management plan, during the assessment of its effectiveness, and in daily staff activities.
Monitoring identifies what is being monitored, and it is based on the protected area's values it describes the ecological attributes, and the indicators that will be chosen in priority.
Monitoring needs qualitative criteria, and is therefore assessed for the results it provides, but also for the way it is carried out.
It is based on the strong knowledge of the ecology of the values that are to be monitored.
Monitoring is adapted to the monitored values, its responsiveness, in particular, allows to detect variations of the ecological attributes in a good and workable way.
Sampling must be precise and relevant.
The chosen method must be representative and explainable to all.
And it must give way to the least bias possible.
Monitoring means effort.
So sampling needs to be random, if possible, and not centered on the accessible areas or the ones where we know species are plentiful.
The chosen method needs to be sustainable, therefore needs to remain unchanged over time.
Or the possible changes need to be justified, at least.
Honesty is key.
Meaning, tampering with protocol or results, to make them more impactful or meaningful, is useless, and will sooner or later be noticed.
You need to keep the original hypotheses in mind, because the conditions, the choice of methods, can influence the way we interpret the data.
The surveying method needs to be replicable by each operator.
Because individuals don't make the results.
The monitoring results have to be used for what they are.
If the bias are too important, you need to have the wisdom and the courage to speak up.
You also need to be smart when extrapolating the data.
Because you can have statistics to say what you want them to say.
So common sense need to prevail.
If you want monitoring to be realistic and sustainable, it needs to be adapted to skills, to the needs and the site of course.
Monitoring needs to be enhanced.
In other words, the cost, the working time needed, the means to mobilize, and the skills to acquire, need to be extremely well-managed.
All the relevant data need to be accessible and stored.
This will guarantee transparency, sustainability and credibility of the monitoring.
The results need to be communicated simply.
Meaning that monitoring is useful only if the results are shared.
Finally, monitoring is carried out by the stakeholders of the protected area's management itself, and shouldn't be outsourced.
The first call of monitoring is indeed to improve the site's management itself.
There you go.
Some simple rules that we hope will be useful daily in the execution of your ecological monitoring plan.
