Hello, welcome to module 3.
My name is Maria Rosário Martins, and I am professor of statistics  and research methods
 in the Institute of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal.
 And I am also the coordinator of this module.
 Today my topic is on the definition and specification
 of implementation strategy.
This is the first talk in the series that will discuss in detail the design of an implementation strategy.
Let me begin by giving you an overview of what I want to cover today.
 I'm going first to introduce you to a real life example,
 related to bed nets delivery  in Mozambique.
 Then, I am going to talk about two possible definitions
 for implementation strategy  together with real life examples.
And finally, I'm going to present 5 important dimensions that are very useful in the description
 of implementation strategy.
 So, the fundamental point that drives this segment
 is that implementation strategies description must be very precise.
This explanation must allow us  to measure the different components of the strategy, and also  to reproduce it.
At the end of this chapter we hope that you will be able to identify the different types  of implementation strategies,
 to specify the different types of implementation strategies,
 and to use these concepts in real life examples
 related to diseases of poverty.
Let us begin our lecture  by presenting an example
 related to the bed net delivery in Mozambique.
 So, what is the problem?
Malaria is considered the most important public health problem
 in Mozambique.
It is the leading cause of mortality
with 35% of children aged under 5 years testing positive for malaria parasites in 2011.
Moreover, in these children malaria accounts for
42% of deaths.
 In addition, we also know that malaria prevalence is different
across the regions with very small figures in the capital Maputo, that is around 1.5% and it is very, very high in Zambézia with numbers around 55%.
 And we can all see that in general
 prevalence rates are higher  in the North,
 and lower in the South.
In terms of coverage, the indicators are also below the target.
 As we can see in this table,
in 2011 only 36% of children under 5 slept under a bed net.
Furthermore, only 34% of the pregnant women slept under the bed nets.
One can ask, why the different interventions do not reach the desired outcomes?
We have a health problem.
On the other side we know that there are efficacious  interventions.
So, what do we know exactly?
We know that the use of bed nets, in particular, long lasting nets are efficacious.
We also know, that the use of bed nets reduces malaria episodes among children.
And finally, we also know that the use of treated bed nets is cost effective, namely, the long lasting ones.
However, there is still a low coverage in Mozambique.
 So, again...
There is an efficacious intervention.
 But, there is an implementation problem.
We need to develop or to design strategies
 in order to improve the bed nets used
 by the population in need.
 As conclusion, we know that the use of bed nets
 reduces malaria transmission rates.
But, we need more research into the most effective and sustainable way to deliver those bed nets and to assure that they are properly used.
 But one can ask, what are the reasons for this failure?
 The literature identifies several reasons for this failure.
On one hand, there are several issues related to supply chain  in the countries, that don't have a formal system for routing distribution.
On the other hand, in Mozambique there are poor road conditions.
As we can see in the map, Mozambique is a very large country, and many districts are not accessible during the rainy season.
 Finally, there are also issues related to the poor
 information management systems
 to detect shortages and stock-outs of malaria products.
So, we have a research question, and we need to develop effective solutions
 for the problem related to  implementation.
As we already know, that  in the first phase we need to identify the problem  and its context.
And then, the second phase
 is related to the design  of the implementation strategies.
But, what is an implementation strategy?
Well, it is not easy to find in  the literature a consensus about a definition of an  implementation strategy.
Perhaps the main challenge in  defining implementation strategy is that implementation research  draws insight and techniques from a range of disciplines, including economics, management, social psychology, behaviour science,
 and applied statistics.
And of course, each discipline  comes with its own techniques, norms and jargon.
Here we are going to present 2  possible definitions for implementation strategy.
The first one is based on the paper by Proctor
 and colleagues in 2013
where implementation strategies are defined as methods or techniques used to enhance the adoption, implementation,
 and sustainability of a clinical programme or practice.
 So, let's give an example.
An implementation strategy used to improve the coverage and quality of immunization programs is supervision lists.
Another important definition is the following:
 implementation strategies can be defined as strategies
 needed to deliver or implement the products or interventions.
Let's illustrate this concept with a real life example.
In Module One, Professor Oladele Akogun   described a very interesting implementation research project related to home management  of malaria.
 Do you remember?
 One of the specific objectives of this study
 was to assess whether bringing  information, education,
communication activities and  prepackaged drugs closer to where people live, improves the compliance for caregivers
 with treatment for childhood fevers.
In this study, the following  strategies were developed:
training community-based providers  in Home Management of Malaria, supply of pre-packaging of antimalarial closer to where people live.
And also, the use of the colours  and pictures on the pre-packs with messages to help caregivers to recognize the appropriate treatment. Another example is related to the development
 of intervention specific tools for malaria control in schools.
Implementation strategies are very important
 in implementation research. Why?
Because they represent the "How to" component
 of changing health service delivery in low and middle income countries.
So, don't forget...
Implementation strategies are  related
 to the "How To" component.
Now that we have defined implementation strategy, and that we have presented  some examples
 let's come back to the identification  of different types of implementation strategy.
 In previous examples,
 we saw that the complexity of implementation strategies
 can be very different.
A very simple strategy is the intervention specific toolkit
 for malaria control in schools.
Other examples include:
local needs assessments, stakeholders consultations, community visits and meetings.
Well, in this case when only one strategy is developed it is usual to call it a discreet or single component strategy.
Now, be very careful because in some publications they are also called  implementation interventions,
 or actions.
Now, let's consider the situation where several strategies
 are combined.
In this case it is called a multi-faceted implementation strategy.
 An example is training, consultation, audit and feedback.
 There are also some implementation frameworks that include
a number of discreet implementation strategies combined in a specific way.
 One of these models is  the Replicating Effective
 Programmes framework.
This model provides a roadmap  for implementing evidence based intervention  into communities based settings through a combination of several  strategies in order to maximize the chances of sustainable interventions.
The model includes a number of discreet implementations
 strategies across 4 phases.
 The first phase, is  Pre-Conditions.
 The second phase, is the  Pre-Implementation.
 The third phase, is  Implementation.
 And the last phase is the  Maintenance and Evolution.
Examples of strategies included on each of these phases are represented in this figure.
We saw that in the Replicating Effective
Programmes model, implementations strategies are classified according to phases.
Another approach is to group the implementation strategies in terms of the actor or the stakeholder using them.
Usually implementation strategies include:
 enhancing the capabilities  of government,
 improving the performance of provider organizations.
But they include also, strengthening the capabilities and  performance of individual providers.
 They include also empowering  communities and households.
And finally, they also are related to supporting multiple stakeholders engaged in improving health.
This information can be organized in a table where the first column corresponds  to the main actor
 and the second column corresponds to the implementation strategies.
There are some examples of  implementation strategies at different stakeholder levels.
At the government level, policy reviews are usual implementation strategies.
 At the community level,
 training and community mobilization
 are frequently implementation  strategies.
Finally, situation analysis is a very good example related to multiple actors implementation strategies.
 Now, let's go back to the example related to
Home Management of Malaria.
One of the strategies was to conduct a situation analysis, and this situation analysis was used to develop
a better understanding of community process and community perception of  the use of pre-packs for treating fevers in children.
Also, to document community  concepts of ill health and perception of malaria treatment seeking behaviour,
 and to identify channels for  communicating health information.
 The situation analysis was also very useful to document   drug names, design of pre-packs and different age groups,
 nature of packing, etc.
In this case, what are the main actors?
 Yes, the main actors are multiple actors.
Another strategy was training  community based providers
 in Home Management of Malaria.
 In this case, what are the main actors?
 Yes, the main actors are  the community.
 Finally, in implementation strategies related to information,
 education and communication,
 what are the main actors?
Yes, the main actors are communities and households.
As a summary,
 We saw that the actor or the stakeholder
 is an important dimension for implementation strategy specification.
 However, as we will see later on...
there are other key elements for implementation strategy specification.
 Namely, the action,
the target, temporality
 dose,
 implementation outcomes, and justification.
We are going to be talking about some of these issues in greater detail over the coming weeks.
 That brings me to the end of what I wanted to cover today.
So, over the next coming weeks you are going to be hearing  a lot more about
 each one of these issues.
It's a pleasure to be with you today.
 Thank you for your attention.
