The restricted three-body problem, the general three-body problem is complex and we will not cover this in this course.
The restricted three-body problem is the following: we have two relatively large bodies it can be for instance the Earth and the Moon or it can be the Sun and the Earth, ignoring all the other planets.
And we have another body which is a spacecraft which is the black dot in this drawing.
We have a certain number of conditions, the two main bodies on the circular orbit around the center of mass of the system.
We don't need to have or mind these two large bodies, one being much smaller or less massive than the other one.
Typically, in the case of the Earth and the Moon, the Moon is a relatively massive object compared to the Earth, less mass obviously but it's not infinitely small compared to the mass of the Earth.
Now for the third body, the black dot in this drawing, typically a satellite or a spacecraft, its mass has to be much smaller than the mass of the other two bodies.
And we consider the motion of this small body in the plane of the orbit of the two main bodies.
Now it just happened that we have a certain number of positions called the <i>Lagrange</i> points where the small body, the black dot, keeps the same position with respect to the other two bodies as the two bodies are revolving around each other.
There are five such points, five Lagrange points.
Now let's consider the case of the Sun and the Earth, and let's look at the position of the so-called Lagrange points in the Sun-Earth system.
We have five such Lagrange point.
We have L1 which is located between the Earth and the Sun, and the distance to the Earth of the L1 Lagrange point is about 1.5 million kilometers.
So it's 100th of an astronomical unit, or 100th of the distance between the Earth and the Sun.
We have the Lagrange point L2 which is just on the other side of the Earth versus the Sun,
1.5 million km away from the Earth in the anti-Sun direction.
We have L3 which is a little bit further than the orbit of the Earth, still on the line between the Sun and the Earth.
And we have L4 and L5, which in fact are on an equilateral triangle between the Earth and the Sun, and L4 is similar to L5.
Now it just happens that for these points we have the sum of the gravitational forces of the Sun and the Earth, and the inertial forces on the circular orbits on these points, balancing themselves.
You can imagine on L1 that it is as if you had the satellite or the spacecraft at this location on gravitational orbits around the Sun but with somewhat less mass of the Sun because we have the Earth attracting in the other direction.
Remember that the period is equal to <i>2π √ a³ / µ</i>.
This is the third Kepler's Law.
So if you imagine that for L1 revolving around the Sun, it is as if the mass of the Sun was somewhat diminished because you have the Earth behind, and so the <i>µ</i> is somewhat decreasing the denominator and then the square root for the third Kepler Law, so you have a value of <i>a³</i> and the numerator that is somewhat diminished also.
Now for L2, you have, to a certain degree the mass of the Sun, which is somewhat increased by the Earth situated in between so it's as if you had a somewhat larger mass of the Sun.
So you go around the Sun on a value of <i>a</i> which is a little bit larger according to the third Kepler's Law.
For L3, a point on L3 of course is subject to the gravitational field of the Sun, but you have the Earth on the other side which is as if the Sun had a somewhat larger mass.
So L3 somewhat beyond the Earth orbit on the opposite direction of the Earth versus the Sun.
It's really more complex to look at L4 and L5 but these are so-called <i>stable points</i>.
You have hollow potential, a set of potential lines here so that you have stability of L4 and L5.
For L1, L2, and L3, you have stability across the plane.
The red arrows indicate the stability.
If you go a little bit away from the line between the Earth and the Sun, from the L1 point, you're going to come back because it's stable.
However it is unstable with the blue arrows if you move toward the Earth or toward the Sun from L1.
The same for L2 and for L3.
Here we have a live illustration of the Lagrange points.
L1 on the left hand side, L2 in the middle, and L3 on the right.
This is for the Sun-Earth system and spacecraft indicates that L1 is located between the Earth and the Sun, in fact it's not at scale, it's much closer to the Earth than represented here .
Again, about 1.5 million km away from the Earth.
But the spacecraft keeps the same position versus the Earth and the Sun as the Earth is rotating around the Sun.
Same for L2. Again, 
1.5 million km away from the Earth and the anti-Sun direction for the L2
Lagrange points.
In the case of L3, the spacecraft is not exactly on the orbit of the Earth but slightly further away, but very small distance.
And L3 is very rarely used.
However, L1 is used for spacecraft looking at the Sun, typically Soho, the solar and heliospheric observatory, which is delivering constantly pictures of the Sun,
And there's a good example of a spacecraft on L2, in fact it's a future spacecraft which is the successor to the Hubble space telescope.
The James Web Space Telescope, will be located on L2 and it will have the Sun shield that will prevent the Sun radiation from reaching the telescope and that sun shield will, at the same time be an Earth shield and Moon shield.
It will prevent the radiation from these three bodies, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon from reaching the telescope, which means the telescope can be kept at a very low temperature of about 40 Kelvin.
