On this picture you see the International Space Station, picture taken in 2011, when we still had the Space Shuttle, which you see here docked to the forward portion of the International Space Station, or the US-OS segment.
And in the back of the ISS you have the ATV, the Automatic Transfer Vehicle, docked to the Russian segment.
This part is the Russian segment, and you have either a Progress or a Soyuz vehicle that are attached to ports on the Russian segment.
Now you see ATV attached in the back.
This is a favorable position, because not only ATV could bring resupply equipment, and fuel, and water, and payloads and food for the crew, but it also could reboost the Station, firing thrusters with the proper attitude, which was more the X-axis of the Station, oriented horizontally.
You could reboost the Station to the nominal altitude.
Now these are all the ATV missions that were flown, launch date was from 2008 until 2014, for the five ATVs that were launched, each of them with the name of either a scientist or a writer.
The re-entry of ATV was destructive.
The crew was putting trash inside the ATV after completion of the mission, which means after it had been emptied of all the equipment brought to the Station.
After it had done, in many cases, a reboost of the Station, it was filled with trash and was de-docked, and then there was an automatic re-entry, but a destructive re-entry in the atmosphere.
Now this is a view of the ATV as it is approaching the back of the International Space Station, to the Russian segment.
It was using various videometers, and retroreflectors, and GPS navigation to do, again, an entirely automatic approach to the Station and docking.
There was a possibility for the crew on board the Station to monitor the approach, and do an abort of the approach of ATV if needed.
It never happened - all the times we had successful final approach and docking of ATV with the ISS.
Here you see the inside of an ATV.
You have one compartment of ATV which is accessible by the crew, typically to get some food, some equipment, some payloads.
And the back of the ATV, on the right-hand side, has tanks, water tanks.
The oxygen is generated on board the Station using water.
And also fuel, and thrusters.
The thrusters are not very visible, but just here, the small thrusters that were used in order to do the reboost of the International Space Station.
At the end of the mission of ATV it was detached, and prepared for destructive re-entry.
Now, this is rendezvous profile of ATV versus ISS.
It's pretty much like we saw for the Shuttle.
Basically, ATV was coming from behind the Station, and below the Station.
At this point here we had a circular orbit - circular orbit means a straight line - and of course the motion was from the right to the left here, because the velocity vector of the station, which is here, is to the left, and the idea is to get to S_2 after a certain time.
And the timing was also arranged so that ATV would arrive at the Station in daylight, for better visibility of the crew to the approaching re-supply vehicle.
On this point you see that the orbit has been changed to an elliptical orbit.
This is the perigee of the elliptical orbit, and it gets to this point here, where, again, the orbit of ATV is going to be made circular, that's why we have a straight line parallel to the surface of the Earth, because we know the X-axis, which is straight here, is in fact a curved line which is parallel to the surface of the Earth.
On S_1 we transform our orbit again into an elliptical orbit, which will have the apogee in S_2 and then we look at the next slide to see the final approach of ATV to the ISS.
Here we have S_2 and again, pretty much like the final approach of the Shuttle to the ISS, when we reach S_2 which is at the same altitude as the Station but it's behind it.
As we come from an elliptical orbit which has a smaller, semi-major axis than the radius of the circular orbit of the target, which is the Station, we have a relative velocity towards the right.
We are slower than the International Space Station.
At this point we need to give a posigrade burn; again, it was done automatically in order to raise the perigee to this altitude here, so that we have the <i>ΔX</i>, here corresponding to what we want, so that eventually we will get to S_3 which is 250 meters behind the International Space Station.
And the last part of the automatic approach to Station was done horizontally, using these various sensors, videometers, and retroreflectors.
