Hello, my name is Willy Benz
I'm a professor for astrophysics and physics at the University of Bern in Switzerland.
I did my physics studies in Neuchâtel and Geneva where I got my degree.
Then I spent some time in the USA at Los Alamos, at Harvard and at the University of Arizona before coming back to the University of Bern where I'm working since 1997.
My research interests deal with planetary science, in particular, the formation and the evolution of planetary systems and planets and small bodies in the solar system as well as outside in relation with exoplanets.
CHEOPS is the first small mission in ESA, the European Space Agency
Science Program.
And it's something very special because it's the first of its kind, and it has a bit different constraints then all the other missions that are not normally run by ESA.
In particular, as the name says, it's a small mission.
And small means budget wise so we have been limited in the budget.
ESA contribution to CHEOPS is 50 million euros, and we also have limited time at our disposal to build and fly the mission, the constraint was 4 years of development time.
So the challenges with the small missions were to propose a scientific mission that could be relatively cheap and at the same time be executed relatively fast.
And so we proposed the idea of a follow up mission to characterize exoplanets.
So the idea is we know a lot of planets from radial velocities, where we measure the wobble of the star, and for these planets we know at least a lower limit of the mass besides orbital parameters.
On the other hand, we know a lot of planets from transit measurements where satellites have measured the radius of these planets by looking at the dimming of the light when the planet transits in front of its star.
However, we have very few objects for which we know both the mass and the radius.
So the idea with CHEOPS was to follow the brightest stars for which we know their planets and try to find a transit there in order to measure their radius.
So it is a follow-up mission, it's not a discovery mission, but it will allow us to measure with high precision a large number, we hope, of exoplanets.
So, of course, during this 4 ½ years of development, they are a number of key elements that have to fall into place.
First, of course, was the selection itself when we got selected, and that was in 2012 when CHEOPS was selected by ESA.
And then, as usual, in the ESA missions, there is a detailed study phase where selected missions are being studied in order to see whether the mission can actually fulfill its scientific promise within budget and within time scale.
And we managed to get through this study, and we were, what ESA calls, adopted, mission adoption.
About a year later, since then, we've been building models, and right now, in spring of 2016, we're going through CDR, the Critical Design Review, where everything has to fit.
All the models, all the tests have been made.
All the breadboards have been completed, and the final review before the actual building of the satellite in industry and delivery for launch.
Launch-readiness is foreseen end of 2017.
CHEOPS will be a passenger on a rocket with a much bigger satellite to minimize the cost, and because of that, the launch date will depend on what the main passenger will do.
And so we just have a launch-readiness date, but this will be the big date, end of '17, and then whenever the launch will take place will probably be very early 2018, with a nominal mission duration of 3 ½ years.
On CHEOPs, I am what's called the principle investigator, so basically I'm in charge of organizing the team that builds this satellite,
I should say, the instrument.
There are two different aspects of this mission.
ESA is responsible for launch facilities.
It's responsible for the platform and the consortium, which is 11 European countries working together, is responsible for delivering the payload.
In our case, the payload of CHEOPS is a simple telescope that is mounted on the platform.
The telescope is able to point to different stars that we want to study the planets.
So my role is to run this consortium of 11 countries, make sure all this runs smoothly and try to intervene whenever this is the case; it's necessary.
In Bern, we have a so-called prime of the instrument, and therefore, the instrument is being designed.
It will be assembled when all the pieces come from the different countries.
It will be assembled in Bern and then it will be calibrated and tested.
All that in Bern before being shipped to the platform.
Well that it is for sure a challenge.
I mean from an organization point of view, it would surely be easier if one could do everything oneself without such a big collaboration because it becomes a nightmare to define all the interfaces, of course.
If one piece is delivered from Italy, another one from Germany, a third one from Austria, all these pieces when they come to Bern, and they are assembled, they must fit together.
Every screw must have in front the hole where we can put it in, and if everybody does not deliver everything correctly, then we have major problems.
So it is an enormous amount of work to define all the interfaces between the different parts of the instrument that are delivered from different countries.
Now the good part of such a collaboration is it makes things possible.
We alone, Switzerland alone, Bern alone would never have had the means to build the entire payload alone.
So grouping ourselves, getting together, creating such a consortium, allows the building of CHEOPS, allows to get the funding together to be able to build this, allows us to get the experience and know-how together in order to build a working instrument.
It is an administrative overhead quite large, but it is the only way that one can get to actually do these relatively complex and expensive hardware.
And it's interesting to work with people from different countries.
You first of all get to visit the different labs, which is always interesting.
You get to meet the different culture, eat the different food.
So it has an interesting cultural experience to it.
But I must say sometimes, it would be easier if we were to do everything inhouse.
So CHEOPS needs to be measuring the radii of exoplanets.
In particular, also small ones, an object like the Earth.
Now if you take the Earth, and if you have the Earth's transit in front of the Sun, and you look at the Sun from far away, you will see a slight decrease of the luminosity of the Sun when the planet transits, and this slight decrease is roughly one part in 10^4 or 100 ppm.
So it is a minute decrease in the light intensity from the star that we have to measure.
First of all, this is why we cannot do it from the ground, so this is why we have to go to space because the atmosphere has introduced too much noise in the light signals, so we cannot do it from the ground, at such a small planet.
So in space is the only way to measure photometrically such signal with precision that allows us to measure these radii in the end.
You have to imagine the transit takes several hours.
The planet transits during several hours in front of the star.
During this time, the satellite orbits the Earth several times, and the result we have to measure the light over this period to a precision better than these 100 ppm if you want to measure the radius with accuracy.
So we set the requirement at 20 ppm.
So we want to be able to measure the light signal during a period of several hours to a precision of 20 ppm.
And this is a real challenge because the satellite is in a Low Earth Orbit, orbiting the Earth, so you have reflected lights from the surface of the Earth.
You have reflected light from the surface of the Moon.
You have the satellite orbiting.
The satellite is partly in the sun, partly in the shade.
You have terrific temperature gradients across the structure, and all that is a real challenge to measure the precision.
The rest is relatively, I should say, relatively simple for what space is concerned.
The real challenge is to measure this light's signal to that precision over these periods of time.
And this is a necessity because if we do not make it to that precision, you cannot measure the radius of the planet without precision.
And the purpose of measuring the radius together with its mass is to have the mean density of the planet in order to determine what this planet is made of.
Is is a ball of gas?
Is it a ball of rock?
Is it a mixture of both?
Does it have water and so on?
This you can say something if you can measure the mean density with enough precision, that is the mass and the radius with enough precision.
So all the scientific, technical challenge for CHEOPS resides in being able to measure the signal to that precision.
So all sorts of technical development exist, baffle, inner baffle.
All sorts of control of the system have been built in to achieve this precision.
The second and third challenges have to do with specificity of S-missions [Small-missions] in the fact that we have to build it within a financial envelope for ESA of 50 million and within 4 ½ years.
And this means enormous stress on the time scale.
Things have to proceed fast.
There is no time to study things at length.
Things have to be decided, studied fast, and there is no time to try out things because, again, the time is of the essence, and we have to use almost off-the-shelf components because there is no time to develop new technology.
So all this makes it a real challenge actually.
CHEOPS is not a discovery telescope.
Most all of the other telescopes that have been flown in missions that have been flown so far dealing with exoplanets, namely CoRoT, Kepler, in the future, TESS.
Those are all missions aimed at discovering exoplanets.
In other words, these telescopes look at the patch in the sky for a certain number of time, monitor the luminosity of individual stars during this amount of time and detect those for which a slight decrease of intensity can be the cause of a transiting planet.
CHEOPS is different.
CHEOPS doesn't look at the patch of the sky, doesn't look at 100,000 stars at the same time.
CHEOPS looks at a single star at a time.
So you have to know where to look.
So we are looking at stars that we know have planets, and with CHEOPS we're going to see if the planet transits.
In other words, if the planet is in the right geometrical orientation so that its orbital trajectory takes it along the line of sight through the line of sight.
So in that sense, CHEOPS is unique in this kind of satellite, in a sense that it is really a follow-up mission and not a discovery mission.
So you can choose your targets.
You can move your telescope in the sky.
You can look anywhere in the sky pretty much, not completely, and follow individual objects at a time, what none of the others have been able to do.
So on one hand, we lose the aspect of discovery.
On the other hand, we gain extraordinary flexibility because we can point at any target that interests us.
So, indeed, the observing time, the 3 ½ year observing time from CHEOPS which correspond to roughly 14,000 orbits.
Eighty percent of this time is consortium time so it is a time for observing time reserved for the scientists who have built the satellite.
They can make their measurements and then publish the data and after a year anyway all the data becomes public.
There are however 20 percent of this time that will be made available to the general community to observe with CHEOPS, meaning everybody can observe potentially with the satellite and look at the star or look at an object in the sky in order to make the photometric measurement that will allow to learn more about this object.
Now the way this is going to function, it is competitive.
ESA will organize a time allocating committee.
ESA will issue a call for observing.
So following the call, anyone with a good idea on how to use CHEOPS can write a proposal about an observation to be done with CHEOPS.
And there will be a jury, a selection committee, a time allocating committee as it's called.
That will look at all these proposals and will select the best ones up to 20 percent of CHEOPS observing time.
And this proposal will be sent to Mission Control together with the proposals from the consortium, and out of that we will make a giant list of all the targets that CHEOPS will have to observe during its 3 ½ year mission time, and then the targets will be observed in a sequence that optimizes the observing time.
It's not convenient to point 
180 degrees all the time, and not all targets will be visible all year in the sky, so there will be an observing sequence decided among all these lists of targets.
And in order to optimize observing time and then sent up to the telescope to carry it out.
The science operation center where this list is being decided, and the commands are being generated to look at will be in Geneva at the University of Geneva, while the mission operation,
I mean the antennas that actually send the data to the satellite, that collect the result of the observation at the end will be located at Madrid.
ESA will issue a call for proposals roughly six months before launch.
So this means it will be some time probably in the second half of 2017 or end of 2017.
Thereabouts ESA will issue that call for the community to hand in, turn in proposals.
This will be ESA's decision so ESA will decide who can apply.
My feeling, but again I'm not 
100 percent sure it's ESA's decision, is it's open to everyone.
And there will be a repeated call.
And these calls will come basically every year until the end of the mission.
And every year there will be this 20 percent of open time attributed to the best proposal.
And finally, there is a little extra thing.
It's called the director's discretionary time.
There is 5 percent that is set aside for the ESA director of science to attribute time on CHEOPS on a discretionary basis.
Basically for targets of opportunity.
For things that suddenly pop up and could not be foreseen even long time in advance.
There will be a mechanism that allows for some relatively rapid intervention.
CHEOPS will last nominally for 3 ½ years.
We all hope and cross our fingers that it will be extended.
The end of mission will be basically connected to the aging of the detector.
The detector is a CCD, and with time going on and radiation being present in space, the CCD ages and at some point, the photometry becomes no longer accurate enough for CHEOPS to do a good job as intended to begin with.
So once this stage is reached, once the photometry is no longer of the precision required, the quality of the science is decreasing, and at some point, it becomes useless.
At this point, CHEOPS will be terminated, and there is a mechanism in CHEOPS that will allow it to be de-orbited, and the end of CHEOPS will be its burning through the atmosphere.
We took advantage of the CHEOPS mission to promote science and in particular space and planets for school children.
And therefore we organized a number of activities at the University of Bern in Switzerland, but also at ESA, that are aiming at carrying CHEOPS and the idea of planets and rockets towards school children.
And what we have done, we have different activities on the website you can download a certain number of things.
For example, for the very young ones, you can color.
There is a CHEOPS to color.
Then for the not-so-younger ones or less young ones, a cardboard model of CHEOPS that you can cut and build by hand and glue and at the end you have a little CHEOPS model in cardboard.
And the last, for the very advanced, we have files that you can download that will allow you if you own a 3D printer to print your 3D CHEOPS model.
So you have a real CHEOPS model, accurate in 3D which is about this big in the end.
Last but not least, we've also organized a contest, a drawing contest for school children over Europe, within the countries members of the CHEOPS consortium but also from ESA, where we have asked children between 6 and 13 years old to turn in a drawing of rocket, planet, anything to do with CHEOPS and the science theme of CHEOPS that is rockets, planets and the like.
And we collected several thousand of these drawings from all over Europe, and we have selected 3,000 of those, and these 3,000 will now be engraved on a titanium plate about this big.
And that will be mounted on the spacecraft and launched with CHEOPS in space.
So the 3,000 children will have their drawing flying onboard CHEOPS when the mission goes.
In the meantime, they will be very soon able to find the original drawings on the CHEOPS website, where they can find and click on their geographical region, they can click and then they will find their drawing.
Later when the drawings are engraved, the plate will be on the website as well, so the children can then zoom in and find their engraved drawing.
It will look quite like the original drawing.
The resolution will be a bit less, but nevertheless we hope they will recognize them.
And so then they will have that part flying with the satellite.
And with this aspect, with these efforts, we hope to interest school children in space exploration, space programs and physics and planetary sciences.
Working in the field of planets,
I'm, of course, interested in a mission that would allow us to know more about these planets.
First planet has been discovered in 1995 over 20 years ago.
We've discovered thousands of those, but we're only beginning to characterize them.
We know a few things like their orbit, semi-major axis, inclination, eccentricity.
We know few of these things, we have some idea of their mass for some, only lower limits, for others, we have an idea of their radii.
But what we really want to know is what they are made of, whether there is liquid water on the surface, what's the composition of the atmosphere and so on, and eventually, of course, whether there is life on the surface of one of these planets.
And that we cannot do yet with the instruments we have.
JWST will bring us a bit closer to some of these aspects, but what is really needed is a mission at some point that is capable of taking spectra of the atmospheres of planets.
And with the atmosphere, we will be able to answer what the surface conditions of these objects are.
We will be able to measure the chemical composition, and we will be able to estimate the greenhouse effect.
We will be able to estimate the climate of these objects and whether or not these objects could be favorable for harboring life.
Now the next question will be to detect signs of life in this spectrum.
This will be only possible for life that actually modifies its atmosphere enough to be able to be recognized by looking at the spectrum.
But for the time being, this is our only hope to ever detect one of these forms of life on these planets.
And, therefore, in my area, the next, the ultimate mission if you want, would be a spectroscopic mission that allows enough resolution in the near and infrared in order to detect a certain number of key elements that are connected to the physics of atmospheres and life on the surface of a planet.
So there was a proposal in the past.
It was a proposal way beyond its time.
It was called Darwin in Europe.
It was called TPF in the U.S.
These are sort of the big dreams of this kind of mission, but eventually, when we'll need to have such a mission, if one wants to answer these questions, and I think everybody will agree that the existence of life elsewhere on the Earth is one of the major questions humanity has asked itself for decades in the past.
It was sort of philosophy or science-fiction.
Today it slowly moves into real science, and with such a mission, it will then be definitively science.
Ooh that's another thing.
I think I was young.
I was like 13, 14 years old when astronauts set foot on the Moon.
And so as a boy, the combination of astronauts, planets, rockets sort of made it for me, and I think when I started to really think this is a cool thing to do.
In the meantime, I never quite mustered the courage to become an astronaut.
So I remained a scientist, but I still feel this question's extraordinarily interesting.
What I like in particular about exoplanets is that the field is barely 20 years old, meaning it is very young, meaning there is lots to discover, and what we're doing is really sort of first order studies of these things.
We are not tuning the fifth digit of the comma, but we are really at the forefront of a new discovery of plowing through the unknown territories that are revealed to us slowly with time.
And I think this combination of a new field, exciting physics, exciting chemistry together with extraordinary technology, space, that makes it for me extraordinarily appealing, and I've never found a boring minute ever since I choose to work in there.
