Planet Earth is not a perfect sphere.
We all know that.
In fact it has a very complex shape but the major deviation from the sphere is the equatorial bulge.
It's somewhat of a flattened Earth because of the rotation on itself.
The difference between the equatorial radius and the polar radius is about 21 km with a flattening of about 1 / 298.
Now we have 2 consequences because of that shape of the Earth;
the deviation from the pure spherical shape.
On one hand we have the so-called nodal regression for orbits that have an inclination more than zero and less than 90.
Orbits that are basically to the east, we're going to have a nodal regression; the line of nodes will be moving to the west and for inclinations that are larger than 90°, we have
I would say, a nodal progression.
The line of node will be drifting to the east. There's another consequence that the rotation of the line of apsides within the plane of the orbit.
We will not cover this in this course.
We'll only cover the nodal regression or nodal progression.
Nodal regression; let's see what's going on.
We have here a representation of a flattened Earth.
Of course a significant exaggeration of the flattening but it's to better understand what's going on.
We have here the orbit of the spacecraft.
It goes in this direction.
Here we have the Earth equator here.
We have here the spacecraft itself.
This is the center of the Earth and from the center of the Earth we have the radius vector r to the spacecraft.
Now what is interesting to see is that in this situation we don't have a a central force on the spacecraft directed to the center of the Earth but because of the equatorial bulge we have a force on the spacecraft which is somewhat tilted down.
I put here f vectorial; the force exercised  by the Earth with it's equatorial bulge on the spacecraft and you see here that we have a component of the force
I draw here f perpendicular which is perpendicular to the plane of the orbit and of course this means that we have a torque equal to r cross f; the cross product of r and f.
We have a non-zero value of the torque and as you know this is the second law of Newton for rotations.
We have the torque equal to the moment of inertia around the axis, delta times d omega (ω) / dt.
Omega being an angular rotation velocity of the spacecraft on its orbit.
If I represent here the value of omega perpendicular to the orbital plane then in this direction because of the direction of the motion of the satellite around the Earth with an inclination here which is less than 90°.
So if we do this cross product of r cross f which will give us the direction of dω / dt, we see that the dω / dt is inside the sheet.
Which means that this is the ascending node.
This is the point on the equator that is crossed by the orbit going from south to north.
The ascending node is going to drift because of that dω / dt, to the west.
For inclination of less than 90° and it's going to drift  to the east if we have the inclination of more than 90°.
If we represent here the x-axis on our inertial geocentric reference system, we have the big omega (Ω) and we see that dΩ, the right ascension of the ascending node over dt is going to be negative for i less than 90°. dΩ right ascension of the ascending node over dt is going to be positive for i more than 90° which means to the east in this case and to the west in this case and dΩ/dt is going to be equal to zero for i = 90°. So we have no nodal regression at all if we have an inclination = 90° or polar orbit.
By the way if we have an inclination equal to zero degrees, if we have a purely equatorial orbit we also have no nodal regression because we have no node at all.
The node being the intersection of the orbital plane with the equator if both these 2 planes are together obviously we have no intersection between the two.
So in summary we have nodal regression dΩ / dt less than zero for inclination less than 90°.
We call it nodal regression.
If we have inclination > 90, we talk about nodal progression because it doesn't go the west.
It goes to the east.
We call it progression and we have no regression or progression of the nodes for inclination 90° for a purely polar orbit.
Now you can calculate the value of dΩ over dt.
The drifts of the line of nodes is a function of the inclination of the orbits; the semi-major axis of the orbit and the eccentricity.
Let's take for now eccentricity zero so we only have circular orbits.
So obviously we have the inclination that comes into play and the semi-major axis.
With the power 3.5 the denominator, obviously the larger the orbit the less the nodal progression or regression.
That's obvious because if you are very far away from the earth whether there's an equatorial bulge or not it doesn't matter.
It's just a point very far away with a certain mass.
Now you have the influence of the inclination with the cos sign of i it means that the dΩ / dt will become smaller and smaller as you go towards a polar orbit.
Now we have a plot of the nodal regression rates in degrees per day so it's dΩ / dt as a function of the orbital inclination.
So you basically have the cos sign shape of that dΩ / dt versus inclination.
You have the symmetry because you have the cos sign of i.
You have here the values of inclination going from zero to 90°.
Then from 90° to 180° and obviously you have a symmetry.
What is also here very clearly is the influence of the altitude.
The upper line is for a low orbit so over 200 km above the Earth's surface;
The lower line for 5000.
Obviously the higher you are the less the nodal regression for a given inclination.
Now we have seen that we have nodal regression for inclination less than 90° which mean that the dΩ / dt will be a negative and you have a nodal progression with dΩ / dt positive for inclination > 90°.
Now we can use this nodal progression for orbits of a little > 90° inclination to reach the so called
Sun-synchronous condition.
Sun-synchronous condition means the following; the orbit will keep the same orientation versus the sun as the Earth is going around the sun in a full year; a little more than 365 days.
Let's look at the initial condition here.
Here we have an orbit which is seen exactly edge-on; an orbit which has the sun in it's plane and as the Earth is  going around the sun in this direction counterclockwise, if we want that orbit to always keep the same orientation versus the sun it means that the line of node will have to drift to the east, to the east with about 1° per day.
More precisely it has to be
0.9856° per day in order to keep that
Sun-synchronous condition.
Now we have represented an orbit, a peculiar orbit with the sun contained in the plane of the orbit.
Of course it can be for any other orbit. If we want this orbit to keep the same orientation versus the sun as the Earth goes around the sun in one year, then we need to have the nodal progression of about 1° per day or more precisely the value indicated here.
Now we have seen that in order to have Sun-synchronous condition we need to have a certain combination of the inclination and the distance. We of course only consider circular orbits so we are interested in the radius r and the inclination.
More precisely we have here a plot of the orbital altitude above the Earth's surface versus the inclination in order to have
Sun-synchronous conditions.
And again, in order to have a positive dΩ / dt a drift of the line of node to the east, we need to have an orbit a little more than 90° inclination.
Typically it's between
95 and about 105° inclination depending on the altitude.
