Welcome back to the course.
In this third session, we will talk about the main dimensions of managing urban infrastructure systems.
And in doing so, we will proceed in three steps.
We will first outline our overall framework of management and governance, then we will talk about the five dimensions that apply: technical, economic, jurisdictional, social, environmental.
And then, I will come back to the overall framework, and basically define cities as a dynamic complex sociotechnical system.
Now let's start with our framework.
So, you have the overall urban infrastructure system, and in that system you have primary infrastructures: those are that ones we talk about in this course.
Transport, energy, wastewater, drinking water, waste, housing, telecommunications, green infrastructures: those are our primary infrastructures and that is where we focus our management efforts on.
There are basically three objectives, three performance indicators we are looking at: we want these systems to be efficient, we want these systems to be sustainable and we want these systems to be resilient. Those are basically the essential goals that management of these infrastructures pursues.
Transport has to be efficient, we don't want to waste our time in traffic.
Energy, for example, has to be sustainable and city systems have to be resilient, because, for example, after a storm, we want them to function, we want transport or water sewerage to function again smoothly after that.
There are secondary infrastructures like health infrastructures, education infrastructures, nutrition, cultural infrastructures.
We do not talk about them in this course, but, of course, they are important for the overall functioning of a city and they actually function because the primary infrastructures function.
The last element of our framework is basically the goals that this whole urban system pursues.
The urban system wants to provide a good quality of life for the inhabitants; the city wants to be attractive; and the city wants to be competitive internationally.
All of this together aims at these three overall objectives.
We, however, focus on the primary infrastructures, on the management of these, and their performance objectives that are efficiency, resilience, and sustainability.
Let's talk about the different dimensions of the urban infrastructure systems.
Important to mention is, first, the physical infrastructure layer.
We have seen that in the last session, when I showed these maps of each of the cities. For example, we have roads, we have tracks, we have cables, we have pipes, we have green infrastructures
- parks -, we have buildings.
This is a purely physical layer of an urban infrastructure.
On the basis of this physical layer, there are services possible, and I think that's the real originality, the difference of infrastructure systems, and we'll see it again when we talk about their economics.
You have to have a physical layer, and then, on the basis of the physical layer, you can provide services, you can provide transportation services or mobility services, as we call them now.
We can provide energy services, housing services, water services, environmental services, communication services, all of this is possible because of the physical infrastructure and all together, the physical infrastructure layer and the services layer together benefit the citizen and the customer.
Technically, these are networks: there is a transportation network, there is a telecommunications network, there is an electricity network, there is a gas network, there is a water network, and these networks technically are basically composed of two things: lines, pipes, cables and nodes, where these things are connected to each other, or transformed from one to the other.
The city is composed of a series of networks, some of which are related to each other as we have seen before.
In any case, they are huge, they are complex and they need to be ultimately managed as networks.
Let's go to the next I mentioned, the economic dimension, and the originality of the economic dimension builds on the technical dimensions just presented.
The first economic characteristic of urban infrastructure systems is the fact that they have sunk costs.
By sunk costs, we mean the fact that these infrastructures have to be built for a long time, the costs are put somehow into the ground, the money cannot be used for anything else than these infrastructures. They are there for a long time, you cannot recuperate that investment immediately.
Building on the sunk costs is the whole second economic concept: economies of scale.
You have massively invested into an urban highway, into a metro, and then economies of scale means that you basically need to use that infrastructure optimally more, to bring as much transport onto the metro system, because the more you use it, the lower the marginal cost is.
So, the more transport services you have on the transport infrastructure, proportionately the cheaper the cost of that transport is.
And so, you have huge economies of scale, meaning that you have companies, once they have invested, or once the city has invested, it will force it to basically use that infrastructure to the optimum.
The third element is, of course, a consequence of that: that is market power.
These sunk costs and economies of scale of course favor big companies, not necessarily competition.
Historically most of these things are actually monopolies.
By virtue of the technical nature, the sunk costs, the economies of scale, these companies, the urban infrastructure companies, necessarily have market power, and have all kinds of possibilities to discriminate against competitors who may want to enter the market.
But often competitors are almost impossible, because who would invest into a second water pipeline next to the first one?
And the fourth big element here, in economic dimensions, is the fact that we are dealing here with public goods.
Of course, there is a price for these services, for these infrastructure services, but many of these services are produced so as to allow the economic development of the city itself.
It may be commercially viable, but some of these services, as we'll see later, are not commercially viable, simply because they have to be provided for public service purposes.
In purely economic terms, of course, public goods are things that no economically rationally behaving actor, enterprise, would provide, because they cannot really get paid for it.
But these services are essential for the overall city to function and to prosper.
The jurisdictional dimension is particularly important as most of the cities of the world, most of the agglomerations or the metropolitan areas are actually composed of several cities, and the infrastructures cut across these different cities.
You have a transportation system, a road system, a metro system, that covers different cities.
If you go from one part of Paris to the other, you will cross several municipalities, which are cities in themselves.
And this is the case of the infrastructure and the services, and this is a particular challenge for managing urban infrastructure systems because you have to coordinate different organizations, different operators.
There are basically three challenges here: one is interconnecting these systems, so cities have their own water systems, but at some point they grow together, you have to interconnect them.
You have to make things interoperable, so, for example, a tram in one city starts to run on the tracks of another city, these things need, of course, to be interoperable; a bus in one city will operate in another city of the big agglomeration area but it's not necessarily interoperable, because the ways you go out of the bus, the height does not correspond.
You have many things of that sort where you have to create interoperability, mainly by way of jurisdictional, by legal decisions.
And finally, you have to manage these systems as a whole.
It does not make sense to have,
I don't know, three different cities in the big agglomeration of Paris or London and manage each of them separately, this is a huge jurisdictional challenge.
Now, the social dimension.
There are positive and negative aspects in the social dimension.
Among the negative aspects, of course, there is the equity issue, the exclusion issue.
For example, you build a highway right through the city, through areas where these rather poor people live.
They cannot cross the street anymore, they cannot use the highway, and so, basically, this is an equity issue.
You create all kinds of exclusion and there is much of that in the infrastructures.
But on the other side you also have positive aspects: if you have a very good transportation system, you can transport the people working or living at the periphery of the city to the center of the city, where the jobs are, and actually favor inclusion, and favor a more equitable development of the city.
So, infrastructures clearly go both ways: they can favor inequity, and they can favor equity at the same time.
That is something managers of urban infrastructures always have to watch out for. Very similarly, the environmental dimension is very similar to that, because you have negative impacts of infrastructures, you have CO2 emissions from buses, from other transport, you have pollutants, you have noise, you have land use from housing and things like that.
But on the other hand, you also have positive aspects, like energy efficient buildings, green infrastructures, clean energy.
As we have seen in the very beginning, the city is a place where most of the pollution is created, but this is also where actually urban infrastructure managers can make a difference by reducing pollution, by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and infrastructures play a key role in that.
And the management of infrastructure, this is one of the challenges of the managers of infrastructures.
Now to conclude, we come back to our framework.
The city, we said, is a complex sociotechnical system: you have technology, you have jurisdictions, or rules if you want, institutions as we call them. And we have seen that there are big jurisdictional problems in the sense that often there is not one single jurisdiction that covers the whole metropolitan area.
And then, there are huge economic dimensions of that: some of the infrastructures are making money, some are losing money, some are lucrative, some are non-lucrative.
So, those are the three basic elements: the social dimension, and the environmental dimension cut across all this, cut across, the jurisdictional, the economic, and the technology.
All that together leads to the performance of the urban infrastructure system.
Are the infrastructures efficient?
Are they sustainable, is the energy system sustainable?
Are they resilient, meaning can they recover after a major shock?
This is basically the framework, the way we look at urban infrastructure management. We look at the jurisdictional aspect, the economic aspect, the technology, the social and the environment, and see how all these things managed together in the different infrastructures lead to efficiency, sustainability, and resilience.
At the very end of course, what is important is the quality of life in the city, the attractiveness of the city for the firms and for the inhabitants, and the competitiveness of the city in international comparison.
Now, in this session we have seen the different dimensions of urban infrastructure systems, and in the next session we'll now hear from a practitioner how this all plays out in reality.
