So the ambition to develop an African technology demands a wealth of strong contributions.
Firstly intellectual contributions even psychological contributions, to claim:
"We are able to trust ourselves, we are capable of developing our environment, we can be inspired by what others have already done to better adapt it to our own context."
But nowadays I think all my energy goes to telling Africans it's still possible to do something, it is possible to bring something to mankind, but we need a positive view, more self confidence we need more trust, more respect about the fact that we are an elite in this environment that needs us, that needs solutions, that needs innovations, but firstly African innovations, we shouldn't think straight away about innovating at an 
American scale, at a Japanese scale, at a Swiss scale.
We should start with small steps, like we say:
"The longest trip starts with the first step".
Let's do the first step, but in our own environment.
As soon as we have competent personnel to ensure the use of health technology in Africa, we can improve the situation, that gives me hope because the raw material is here and if we also have the know-how in human resources using this raw material is possible, so I have hope that the African technology will evolve.
You see, there are 5 stages in this process.
The first one is drawing what you see!
If you have seen something, you should be able to draw it, how does it work?
You have understood!
But now, do a drawing of it, then being able, truly from this drawing to bring an innovation, improve something rather that it happening like that, it will happen like this. and be able to test it,
IT tools exist for that.
Then be able to reproduce what you have thoroughly tested.
You see! Be able to reproduce and test it then put it into production.
There is a scheme here, sometimes I feel like we want to progress too quickly.
But no! The world has existed for billions of years and it is only as we see it today, so it should go slowly, level by level, learn something the methodical way at that moment, it is said somewhere we will spend 6 days creating the world.
