Without doubt, Crete has a long tradition in the design and development of  place-based innovation policies. 
It's experience dates back in the middle of nineties, where a number of science, technology and innovation programs were launched to support the scaling up of successful bottom up innovation engines. 
It's worth knowing that the existence of the strong research
community of the island, played an important role in shaping the regional innovation landscape of Crete.
In the same spirit, Crete was one of the first Greek regions which embraced the rational of smart specialisation in incorporating it's principles in the regional innovation ecosystem.
Today, smart specialisation strategies are regarded as the corner stone of the regional development plan of the island, and to lift regional planning to a more sophisticated and tailor-made model of innovation policy making.
The application of RIS3 strategies provides an important opportunity for Crete, to mobilize and combine it's micro and commercial level capabilities with the objective to create new trajectories of growth.
Despite the uneven impact of the Greek economic crisis, it's true that Cretan policy makers have started making sense of the RIS3 potential.
The design of smart specialization has been already finished.
And the implementation phase has just started raising important number of interesting challenges and opportunities.
To discuss all these interesting aspects we have invited a mixture of experts, including policy makers, academics, and representatives from the local innovation and entrepreneurial community of the island, providing their smart specialization experiences from different perspectives.
Our Cretan experts help us understand how Crete links its' resources and capabilities with RIS3 potential.
They indicate various challenges and discuss how a series of practical problems related to the entrepreneurial 
(INAUDIBLE)  discovery the national and (INAUDIBLE) 
Cretan (INAUDIBLE) have been overcome, and third, actually increasing opportunity for the island.
Let's start the discussion program.
Prof. Nektarios Tavernarakis
Chairman of the Board at the Foundation for Research and Technology. 
And professor in a Medical School of the University of Crete.
So I would like to ask you
Prof. Tavernarakis, what is the role of FORTH in generating and promoting innovation in the region of Crete?
The Foundation for Research and Technology is a research center conducting research in various fields of science, including physics, biology, mathematics, computer science, humanities and also chemistry.
The overriding criteria in all these schools is always scientific and research excellence. 
Four of the institutes of the Foundation for Research and Technology are situated here in Heraklion.
And the effort is always to connect our research efforts with the local society in the region of Crete.
And exploit research findings and intellectual property to the benefit of the local economy, and the culture of the island.
So (INAUDIBLE) Forth is a key institution here in Crete. 
How it's activities can contribute to the development of the smart specialization strategies in the region of Crete?
Many of the research activities of the Foundation for Research and Technology are well-poised to contribute decisively to the smart specialization strategies.
One example that has actually been a prominent one, is the use of laser technology to clean Cultural Heritage items, monuments, not just here in Crete, but also throughout Greece, and in other areas of the world, actually.
Another one has to do with
Archaeogenetics, the analysis of ancient DNA, as we call it, which allows us to peer back in time and identify characteristics of the local population, but also for plants and animals analyzed by diversity of different eras. 
And this, of course, again links to the very rich
Cultural Heritage of the region of Crete.
Dr. Dimitros Kafetzopoulos
Research Director at Institute of Molecular Biology & Biotechnology, at the Foundation for Research and Technology.
So Mr. Kafetzopoulos, 
I'm glad to ask you how is research linked with the local entrepreneurial resources for the purpose of the history in the region of Crete?
Crete is the region of Greece that has the highest per capita research expenditure.
That means that there are a lot of strong institutes, universities and research infrastructures in this region.
And there have been over the years several collaborations with the industry and the entrepreneurial sector for the development of technologies and implementations of various projects. 
The problem in all this effort is that these have always been short-term and rather limited activity, that it was more or less occasional. 
With the development of the RIS3 framework, what we are expecting to have is a more focused, and a long-term development of these collaborations.
Okay. Do you have any particular examples to share with us?
One example is the collaboration of research institutes with the food industry. 
In one case, local meat industry,
Crete firms, collaborates with our institute, in order to develop technologies for quantifying and monitoring the content of foods in various liquids. 
And the second example is the collaboration with the wine industry, where methods are developed to monitor the aging of wine in the bottle.
And last, but not least,
I have in mind new activity that has started in our institute for the study of ancient DNA that would give us the opportunity to combine the findings of our modern research related to human genetics, to the wealth of theological science that exist in Crete. 
This kind of activity will end up with new information that would allow us to reconstitute our ancestors.
And in that sense, we expect to contribute to the Cultural Heritage activities of the smart specialization. 
Mrs. Maria Kassotaki
Director of the Managing Authority of the Region of Crete.
With 30 years experience in regional development and managing European funds. 
I would like to ask you whether the EU relations for the new program period 2014 to 2020, facilitate or strangle the implementation of the regional innovation strategy of Crete?
The regulations of the new program fail to introduce a number of rules which pose limitations and influence the flexibility of implementing regional innovation strategies.
To be more specific,
I would like to refer as an example the state aid rules applied on innovation actions.
The state aid rules define the content of the call for tenders and therefore influence the attractiveness of the beneficiaries, but also the difficulty of it's implementation. 
I would like to refer as a second problem the legal and institutional framework that is necessary for implementing innovation actions that implement the regional strategy. 
A set of institutional and legal arrangements must be happened in order to be able to get the authority to proceed with these actions.
As a third problem, 
I would like to refer the so-called conditionalities. 
In my country there are some small delays, particularly
in the case of the conditionalities concerning ICTs.
So, all those actions that are included in the regional innovation strategy and concern the application of ICTs in different sectors may have a shorter (INAUDIBLE).
As a fourth problem, and this is the last one, that I would like to refer is the fiscal situation of my country.
It is a difficult economic situation and of course, when that occurs face a lot of problems.
Okay. So you have mentioned four main obstacles. 
So I would like to ask you, how have you managed to overcome such obstacles, such challenges?
We defined two pilot actions, so one concerns diving tourism, innovative diving tourism.
And the second concerns the application of ICTs in the sector tourism and culture. 
In cooperation with the Commission and national authorities, we tried to exclude all ICT actions that are included from the general positionality of ICTs in Greece.
The second was to define very precisely the actions that we are going to the actions that are going to define us to buy the problem.
The last thing is try to find all those possibilities that exist in our country in order to facilitate the entrepreneurs to participate. 
Fantastic.
Thanks very much for your time.
-For your effort.
-Thanks a lot. 
Mr. Artemis Saitakis
Director of the Science and Technology Park of Crete.
The first question is what methodical steps have been followed by the region to set the strategic priorities of the island?
For the preparation of the regional innovation strategy, the Government of Crete established the Regional Innovation Council in 2011, consists of the experts and representatives of regional stakeholders.
It started it's activities by the creation of 11 working groups in the priority areas of the region, all proposed by it's members.
After 3 years of work, the groups prepared and submitted reports on the current situation of innovation capabilities of the region.
As well as proposals in the priority areas of the new strategy.
Following the preparation of the strategy, the regional government put in place an inclusive and transparent consultation process where the regional stakeholders expressed their opinion and submitted comments.
How do these priorities reflect on island's capabilities and resources?
The areas where Crete has comparative advantages is a result of an analysis of the regional competitiveness, strengths and capabilities, and it's research and scientific potential.
Four of my sectors have been selected as the strategic priorities. 
Agro-food, culture tourism, environment and knowledge. 
Each sector has been selected following an extensive analysis of capabilities, competencies and  challenges. 
Is there any particular example that you can share with us?
Two examples are the wines of Crete cluster and the marine technology sector. 
The wine cluster of Crete was established in 2006, and is very active in the promotion of the Cretan wines.
The cluster cooperates closely with academia which has already developed new products and services.
The marine technology sector cooperates with academic institutions and the tourism industry.
Main activities are the promotion of the blue economy and the development of high value-added tourism like the diving tourism.
It is expected to upgrade the tourism project to the island, develop new activities, as well as the creation of - 
Dr. Maria Makridaki
Technology Transfer Consultant at the Technology Transfer Office of the Foundation for Research and Technology.
Maria, I would like to ask you if there are any initiatives or tools available to support smart specialization practices in the region of Crete?
The Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas (FORTH) has been an enthusiastic supporter of RIS3.
Crete is privileged to have an excellent talent research and educational ecosystem, but there is no interaction with the enterprises of Crete.
On the contrary, the invent here, exploit elsewhere phenomenon is illustrated on a large extent in Crete.
FORTH has recognized that the RIS3 is an excellent opportunity to support industry-academic collaboration.
Based on those observations, the Cretan Innovation Initiative,
CRINI project was introduced. 
The basic idea is that the seven research educational institutes of Crete will collaborate in an inclusive and holistic way in order to serve the R&D needs of the Cretan enterprises.
The main idea behind the project is to create synergies between the research and the entrepreneurial ecosystem of Crete.
That will support local enterprises and young entrepreneurs, and create a novel brand name for the region of Crete, that will eventually attract high tech companies and investors.
Thus creating new conditions for this economic development of Crete. 
How is CRINI Project expected to affect the RIS3 processes in the region of Crete?
FORTH, by introducing the CRINI Project managed to motivate all the other institutes to work together in order to support
RIS3 implementation in Crete. 
The CRINI Project is expected to become the bridge between the research and entrepreneurial communities of Crete that will facilitate the launch of new R&D projects on the strategic areas indicated by RIS3.
The CRINI Project will also have a very important role in the entrepreneurial discovery process since one of it's main activities is to map all the research potential and mature research results that could serve the needs of local enterprises on the thematical priorities set by RIS3.
We are with Mr Stavros Arnaoutakis 
Regional Governor of Crete.
Thank you for accepting us today.
Mr Arnaoutakis,
Smart specialisation is integral part of Crete's development regional planning.
I would like to ask you what actions did you take during the planning process and what are your expectations for the years to come concerning the implementation and the results of smart specialisation in the Region of Crete?
The Region of Crete had developed in the past significant activity for  research and innovation.
Back in 2012 we had established the innovation council with prominent scientists and entrepreneurs from the island of Crete.
We have already started and we will have completed until July 2017 a cycle of cooperation between research institutions and entrepreneurs and we have already proceeded with actions concerning tourism, energy environment and culture.
Do you believe that 
smart specialisation helps us leave behind operating models
like "business as users" and to move on with more targeted and specially designed regional development strategies?
Early indications show that public administration's modus operandi is changing.
Research and educational institutions come together with the island's entrepreneurs.
What we need to see is the national policy.
We need help from the E.U. and the central government in order to change the development model of our island.
We believe that the Region of Crete
is able together with the entrepreneurs and the island's top scientists to change our development model. 
