Värmland is a region in Sweden
with a population of 276,000 and a land area slightly smaller than that of Israel.
If you compare Värmland with Europe as a whole, it's scarcely populated rural region.
The employment rate is relatively high when considered in the European perspective. 
The labor market is gender segregated with women often active in the areas of health and social care. while men are most active in the areas of manufacturing, extraction and IT.
It is estimated that a large share of the work force is dependent on the region's
Forest based bioeconomy.
Värmland is a region that is dependent on exports with Norway and  Germany being important customers.
Regarding GDP, Värmland is very close to  EU mean.
The level of higher education is above average when compared to other to other European regions
And the level of education is generally higher.
On the European innovation scoreboard in a range of four categories
Värmland is placed in the second highest category strong innovators
One milestone for Värmland was that we participated in the project.
It was in the period of 2005 and 2007.
This was about how our universities comely cooperate with the regions
We got a number of recommendations from these expert groups from university
For instance, they said that we should form a contract on Research between
Karistad  University and legion of Värmland and we should also focus more on strengthening the links between the clusters and the researchers
So when we started the process of forming the Värmland region research and innovation strategy for small specialization we for instance had two generations of such research agreement with the university
We have the cluster strategy in place and also, an entrepreneur strategy
I think we had 3 to 4 worsens of the regional development programs as an experience base.
So we both had the policy side in place and we also had the culture and how we cooperate in Värmland.
So I think the
Sedea recommendations were very much in line that we got them out in 2006, there were very much in line with what later became smart specializations 
So we were quite well prepared well enough for forming this strategy when we took off.
When forming the Värmland list 3, we started off making some analysis.
The first thing was to put together or compile what we already knew from all the reports.
The second thing was to make a statistical analysis of the strongest branches, industrial branches in Värmland and then the most central thing was to make a quality analysis of the strongest branches and connect them to the research areas and get to know how strong they were.
So we mainly seen on international perspective, so it was a kind of a bench marking for us.
Next phase in the work was forming working groups around these identified strongest areas, than the most promising areas
We involved in total 60 persons with equal distribution between the researchers, public sectors and industry people.
These groups contributed to the analysis, especially the researchers with their global perspective on research and on related branches
Each of the group made a SWAT analysis for their own strong area
They formed a vision and formulated the most valuable assets that already existed in the region to build up on.
They also formulated which were
the most critical actions that should be taken in order to move in the direction towards the vision which was formulated.
In this stage we had five,
a branch elated smart specialization and one horizontal as well.
After that the Värmland risk free document was put together and anchored by the different actors and stakeholders in the region.
The cooperation with 
Region Värmland,
I mean, it's been on going for quite some time, but it took a new step in the common development based on an OSD review.
We have a mutual understanding, a mutual strategy which we both benefit from.
The corporation with Region Värmland took a really big step in a in an common lateral return, common agreement between 2010 and 2014 where we invested together in a term professional-ship program.
The term professorships were build up in the connections between the development in the industry, the public sector and also the civic society in Värmland, but also to relate to the Karistad University strategy.
I find that researchers get involved quite easily since they have been involved since a long time ago
We have had this cooperation 
Karistad University region of Värmland for many years now and the previous program referred to as  term professorship program, there you could see that a lot of these established context were made that we now can easily build upon and also the researcher was involved when the strategy was formulated and also when the agreement was formulated because when the agreement was formulated they were asked to give suggestions for what kind of project would be important
for the development in Värmland, both for the research and both for the regional development related to smart specializations strategy.
The next step now in the corporation in Region Värmland is built on the innovation strategy called the Smart
Specialization Strategy in Värmland where we have been able to integrate the university strategy into the smart specialization strategy and form the new agreement between the two parties based on that.
So we foresee that this is a very important step for both Värmland but also for the University in reaching the strategies that we have set up. 
If we compare with previous agreements that Karistad University and Region Värmland has have like the term professorship program, the new thing with the academy for smart specialization , is that it has  higher ambitions for creating a platform between the projects that are currently on going from the agreement.
Like in the term professorship program, you could see that it was more of separate projects within the areas, and now the ambitions is to create energies between the projects and to also build in a support function for future development to take place for future projects to happen.
Smart specialization, as I understand it is about smart ways of using and operating on assets and resources in the region.
Its about innovative ways of creating value for different stakeholders, users, customers, companies and also for citizens in young world.
The corporation  has actually been branded as the Academy of Smart Specialization and for us its something unique to have that kind of brand of a, such an important agreement.
So we are glad with that.
This is step by step or interactive way of working in the working groups resulted in the common understanding of the situation, the challenges, the opportunities,  et cetera.
The participants could also  anchor the work in progress back home in their own organizations, at Karistad University or in the cluster organizations with the industry.
Inspired by the Germany region, the lowest Saxony, we use the triangle model with the other industrial branches at the base of the triangle, the research areas on the other, on one of the sides of the triangle, and on the other side, more market or demand side aspects.
If we could find strengths on all three sides of the triangle for a specialization, this was a good candidate for a Värmland specialization. 
This was also ground for the priority between the vice specializations where the Forest-based Bioeconomy came out as the strongest specialization and the one with the highest priority. 
So a knowledge triangle is a way of explaining that it's important to build strong linkages between education, and innovation and research. 
So the academic for smart specialization is trying to establish these knowledge triangles by making things happen by creating meeting places, by organizing activities for making these entrepreneurial discovery processes happen, and by organizing experience exchange between the projects and between the specializations that we have. 
Our specializations says not only what we are good at but also what we are good for. 
They should create value for customers, citizens, or sometimes patience as well. 
It should be reasons for researchers
to participate and it should create values for companies involved in this. 
Smart specializations should also be a part of the solution of societal challenges. 
So there are Academy for Smart Specialization. is organized, it's not a legal body and it's not a specific institution
You find somewhere that you can go to and visit, it's actually a platform for cooperation  and connecting people, and we have a working group consisting of representatives from both the organization; 
Karlstad University
and Region Värmland, that is following ideas and initiatives from an early stage into development of projects, concrete projects, where you have your own co-finding in the project but we also have the working group helping with finding external funding. 
And the we have a stirring committee, consisting of the senior management from both organizations and they draw up the strategic lines for the cooperation for future development, and take the strategic decisions and make sure that we're in line with the budget decided. 
And then we also have intentions of establishing more support functions for the academy like supporting outcomes from the projects, that they are involved in, educational programs. 
So the academy is built for everyone that is interested in finding possibilities for cooperation, and that of course have their own time and funding for supporting projects that we would like to create, and it's for researches that cost the university, it's for the cluster organizations to be part of, it's for industry, public sector, for civic society.
If you have business angels, they can also participate, and of course, it's for the students.
The expectation for the Academy for Smart Specialization is that it's going to be a tool for transformation and renewal of public and private sectors in Värmland, as well as, for the research and education of Karlstad University.
I think the more important factors to be able to succeed in this kind of cooperation is that you have a mutual understanding, it must be a win-win solution for all parties involved. 
Both the region of Värmland, 
Karlstad University, but also for the business sector as such, the public sector and the civic society. 
We need to understand that we do have different targets, different missions, but if we can combine those into a common strategy and common goal, then I think we all will succeed. 
Collaboration is very important. 
It is emphasized in the University's Strategic Plan and collaboration is about taking your responsibility, where we contribute with our different resources.
And collaboration need to be a win-win situation and the outcome, the value is different
 for different stakeholder. 
For the university, it could be access to data
for the scholars, or the researchers. 
But it could also be that we get partners for key funding which we need in many of our research applications. 
And for a company, it could mean knowledge they need for their product development or it could be that they get in contact with people that they might employ. 
