Why start this last week by the European experience
 of smart specialisation ?
We could almost say
"honor to whom honor is due".
It is indeed within the European Union that the concept has been developed and that a significant implementation of this policy at a regional level was carried out.
This is why it would be almost impossible to give a course on smart specialization strategies without evoking the European experience.
It is hence in Europe and more precisely in one of these committees of experts that the European Commission likes, the "Knowledge for Growth" committee, that the first article on this concept has been written by myself, 
Paul David, Bronwyn Hall.
We must also mention Bart van Ark with whom I wrote the first briefing on this subject in the same committee in 2008. 
And it is also in Europe within the regional policy framework that the concept has been systematically applied.
So much so that, as Walter Deffaa, the Director of Regional Policy during this entire period, has observed, we count today 120 national and regional strategies over the entirety of the
European Union and its neighbouring countries. 
This map shows us this incredible phenomenon of an academic concept having experienced a significant diffusion in only a few years.
Today, it is more than 40 billion Euros that are directly allocated to R&D and innovation activities through national and regional smart specialisation strategies.
Indirectly, the priorities of S3 enable to mobilize over 250 billion for the economic transformation of the regions.
We must understand that when the first article was written there was no significant application or implementation objective in Europe.
Absolutely none.
At the end of our service in the experts committee we all returned to our studies. 
But then a surprising phenomenon occurred. 
It was during the preparation of the new budgetary period of 2014-2020.
A favourable time for new ideas. 
Moreover, the cohesion policy which manages the allocation of structural funds put in place a new mechanism: the ex-ante conditionality which aimed to help the regions better spending the money received by asking them to comply to different principles aimed at optimizing public spending.
The principle of a smart specialisation strategy became one of its conditionalities.
The one which will determine the funding to R&D and new technologies. 
Thus, each region is somehow obliged to design and implement a smart specialisation strategy.
This has led to the incredible spread of smart specialisation ideas and practices. 
But why this idea and not another?
There are many other good ideas floating around academic circles. 
Let's stay humble regarding the success of the concept and its incredible impact: without the principle of ex-ante conditionality if, for example, the strategy had remained as a simple recommendation and not as an obligation the story would have naturally been very different. 
So many brilliant academic ideas in the field of public policies never crossed this invisible line which separates the world of ideas from the world of practices.
This one crossed the line.
Perhaps thanks to its intrinsic qualities but also assuredly because of this new principle of ex-ante conditionality which has structured cohesion policies since 2014.
Beyond the mobilisation of the European Commission as well as that of the
European Investment Bank, interest and political support of many institutions have played a major role.
Thus, the EU Council of course as this quotation proves it.
But also the commitment of some members of the European Parliament.
I am thinking of  
Lambert Van Nistelrooij for example.
Also, regional coalitions such as the Vanguard Initiative that reflects the strong political support of certain regional governments:
Catalonia, Scotland
Lombardy, Wallonia
Auvergne Rhone Alpes, and many others.
These champions of smart specialisation strategy have incessantly defended the concept and actively participated to its spread in the political circles in Brussels as well as in the national and regional capitals. 
Another decisive factor in the spreading of the concept and its operationalization was the development of a technical assistance platform hosted by the European Institute of Seville who played and continues to play a key role in the field of operational research, indicators and technical assistance.
This platform has sparked decisive advances in many areas.
The platform has also played a key role in the creation of a community of practices made up of hundreds of policy makers of different EU countries and of which a large portion attends this course. 
At the end of these first years, even if the impact assessment has not yet been made, it's a little too early, the European Parliament's opinions based on studies, interviews and visits have been very positive. 
These opinions are close to what we can read in the first partial evaluations such as those of Henning Kroll of the ISI in Karlsruhe.
On this table we see that the smart specialisation strategy has enabled the regions to acquire a better knowledge of their potential and their opportunities which shows that a precondition of the process of entrepreneurial discovery was perfectly fulfilled in most cases.
What about the impact on the coordination of R&D and innovation activities at European level ?
The European Parliament hopes for a decrease in project and infrastructure duplications.
Duplications are a source of waste and of critical mass failure as we've previously seen.
But let's not be too ambitious and imagine that a central planner could organise the regional smart specialisation strategies so as to avoid duplication.
If at least the processes of entrepreneurial discoveries are correctly developed especially at the right level of granularity, the diversity of fields, projects and specialisations should flourish in Europe. 
It is a soft coordination adapted to the complexity of a system such as that of the EU which brings several hundreds of regions together.
In this respect, the smart specialisation approach occupies an intermediate place, as a form of coordination, in between what we might call the Gosplan on one hand and the magical chaos of the market on the other.
A soft coordination means that each region will certainly share one or two priority areas with others even if choices are made at the right level of granularity.
It is inevitable because the space of opportunities and market niches is not infinite, which is a good thing, because these similarities offer learning and collaboration opportunities.
In this case coordination and pooling of certain resources and infrastructures as well as the circulation of knowledge are recommended, as we've previously seen in the case of maritime regions in module 2.2.
A few thoughts to conclude.
The history of operationalization and the implementation of the concept in the EU regions is the story of an obvious tension between on one hand the time which would have been necessary to test this concept and the regions' capacity to implement it thanks to some pilot studies and, on the other hand the urgency of 2014.
An understandable emergency.
Would it have been wiser to wait until 2021?
That is to say the following planification period to operate a significant implementation?
But this tension has enabled the practice to take a lead on the theory.
The consequence was that during the first years there was a lack of a strong concept.
One could say a "tight" concept as a reference and coordination point between the different stakeholders: the Commission, the national and regional instances, the researchers, and the business sector.
And so each party understood what they could or what suited them. 
On the other hand, the positive perspective was that the concept itself, its content and its scope have all continued to develop and to grow thanks to intensive interactions between practice and theory.
Is this a case of
"lost in translation", as the anglo-saxons would call it?
This would mean that if the key concepts are frequently mentioned in speeches and programmes the spirit is not necessarily respected.
Sincerely, I do not think so.
The rather radical novelty of the proposed approach is gradually accepted by the regions.
We will see it in the following sequences devoted to the study of regional cases in the regions of the Basque Country, the Värmland and Crete.
The story is far from being finished.
The different reports of the Parliament recommend to the Regions to re-examine their priorities and to redefine them when they are too large or too vague.
The principles of flexibility and continuous entrepreneurial discovery must be applied and the strategy must therefore benefit from an uninterrupted support and a permanent animation.
Finally, the monitoring and evaluation operations must now be seriously implemented.
In conclusion, although we know that ideas are not eternal and that new ones often come to replace the old ones especially in the case of political changes it would be absurd not to prolong the experience of smart specialisation strategies one way or another.
It would be absurd because the regions learned a lot regarding the best practices and procedures and are now much more capable of effectively and efficiently designing and deploying their smart specialisation strategies.
Thanks in advance to those who followed the story closely and who would like to share their experience and opinion on our forums.
