Let's talk about the alternative method to generate electrical power in space.
Although it has some limitation, we can only use this method if you have a magnetic field around the planet that you are going around.
In this case, for the Earth obviously, would be the case for Mars, would be the case for Jupiter, for instance.
It's by the use of space tether.
A tether is a cable and if you have a long cable in space with two objects at the end of this cable, obviously as we have seen before, this cable will take an orientation such that it is oriented along the local vertical as it goes around the Earth-- let's take the case of the Earth-- it will always stay on the local vertical.
Now space tether applications have been studied by many space scientists, engineers, since Tsiolkovsky himself, the Russian who was of course a rocket scientist but he also talked about the possible use of space tethers for generating electricity or for the use purely mechanically and we'll look at these applications now and in the next video also.
Here you have a overall situation.
You have the vertical space tether.
You have to remember that this tether is in the ionosphere, so it's in a conductive medium, a very very tenuous medium but a medium that is basically made of ions and electrons conducted medium.
Now if you can collect electrons on top, these electrons because of induction-- and we'll come back to that later-- because you are moving rapidly in the geomagnetic field, the induction will drive the electron downwards in the lower body and to a certain degree you need to have an emitter of electrons here, depends on the ability of the lower spacecraft to generate electrons in the ionosphere.
Most of the time, if you have an insulator, which is the case for the Space Shuttle, obviously covered with all these thermal-protection tiles, which also were an electric insulator, you needed to have a emitter of electron.
You reinject electrons in the ionosphere, somehow they come back to the top and you can close the circuit in this way.
So with the induction effect, you create kind of a battery in space with negative pole at the bottom and a positive pole at the top sucking electrons.
These electrons go down the tether then come back to the top and you close the circuit.
So not only you generate voltage due to the induction to the Faraday effect but you generate electrical power because you have a current in addition to the voltage.
Now we have represented here the motion of the tether, which is to the left you have the geomagnetic field here.
You have to realize that this system is going to work fine when you are relatively close to the equator with the magnetic field lines pretty much horizontal or close to the horizontal.
If you are in the vicinity of the magnetic poles of the Earth with the B vector or the magnetic field vector close to the vertical, then it doesn't work anymore.
Anyway, this method that can be used for many many different application.
Electrical power generation is obviously one application; orbital transfer, that's one purely mechanical application and we'll look at this later; study of of the ionosphere because again if you have this big battery in the ionosphere the kind of current that you can get out of the voltage would give you an indication about the conductivity of the ionosphere.
So some of the properties of the ionosphere can be studied.
We can do variable gravity research whenever you are away from the center of gravity of the system, you have gravity that deviates from the micro-gravity.
You could use this to your advantage for science.
You can also provide with tethers artificial gravity for long journeys in the solar system.
This is one concept for human flight to Mars, which could last up to six, seven, or eight months.
In zero gravity would be hard, you get to the planet even though it's only one third G on the surface of Mars, you get there with a crew with no help at all and if there was a way to provide at least partial gravity during the transfer from the Earth to Mars, that would be an advantage.
That could be provide by tethers.
And Earth-Moon payload transfer is also one possible application and space elevator, we'll talk about that.
Now in the electrodynamical application of space tethers, you can either use a system as an electrical generator or as an electrical motor.
Let's look at the applications as an electrical generator.
That's the Space Shuttle, we have tether deployed vertically along the local vertical, all the way to this point here where we have a satellite which is hopefully a good conductor, has good electrical contact with the ambient plasma.
Because of the induction effect and this is Faraday's law.
The voltage is going to be equal to the cross products of the velocity and the magnetic field and then dot product with <i>L</i>,
<i>L</i> being along the vector in the direction of the positive current.
Now in this case we have a <i>V</i> here.
We have the <i>B</i> vector in this direction and this is valid if we are relatively close to the equator, which remains on an orbit which is on one hand relatively low, a few hundred kilometers above the Earth's surface.
So we are in the ionosphere and also we have the <i>B</i> vector pretty much horizontal, in the vicinity of the equator.
<i>V</i> cross <i>B</i> will give you a vector in this direction.
So the negative current will be downwards because this is the direction of the positive charge up and of course electrical current come from electrons coming down that will load the lower body negatively and the upper body will be loaded positively.
Again, that's like if we had a big battery in the ionosphere with a positive pole on the top, a negative pole on the bottom and you create this EMF, electric motor force, in this way.
And again, if you have a way to close a circuit via the ionosphere and for this you need, especially if you have a shadow at the bottom here, you need to have an electron gun reinjecting the ionosphere somehow they find their way upwards, they are collected in the upper body, like a satellite with a conductive pane for instance.
And the use of the system as an electric generator, of course this is represented here.
We'll come back to that on the next slide but you have a Lorentz force, which is retrograde, which is going to cause a breaking of the system, the lower body, which here is the Shuttle and tether itself and satellite on the top because there would be a cost to the electrical energy that you produce and the cost is of course the height of your orbit.
If you have a retrograde force, you are going to decay your orbit slowly and that's what you have to pay for the electricity.
Tether used as an electric motor now.
This is a really promising application of tethers, could be used, for instance, in the case of the International Space Station.
You create a long tether, deploy it vertically from the ISS and then you do what I'm going to just describe in a minute, you can maintain the orbital altitude of the International Space Station or even increase it without using any propellant.
If instead of letting the electrons coming down, which is the natural motion as we described before, if we can use on top a plasma contactor and inject electrons with an electron gun in the ionosphere, we are not going to have this but we are going to pump electrons up in the tether and the Lorentz force, the element of Lorentz force, is <i>dF = Idl</i> the element of length cross <i>B</i> and you see that if you pump the electrons up then the <i>I</i> vector will be down and the <i>I</i> is always in the motion of the positive charges and then instead of having a retrograde Lorentz force, you are going to have a posigrade Lorentz force.
So what you have to pay is of course electrical energy that you have to generate on the upper body, inject electrons in the ionosphere, but you pump these electrons up and then you generate a posigrade Lorentz force that will be increasing the height of the orbit or if you have atmospheric drag you may compensate exactly the atmospheric drag and this way you can maintain the altitude despite atmospheric drag.
Of course the electrons will be collected here at the bottom at the level of the lower body.
This is the use of the system as an electric motor you have to use electrical power in order to generate posigrade Lorentz force and maintain or heighten your orbit.
And the total force on the tether is expressed here.
This is an integral on the length of the tether.
This element of the Lorentz force and you find this here and of course you have to integrate this along the whole length of the tether.
Of course if you have a very long tether, it can be quite a sizable force but you can imagine that you vary the value of <i>I</i> in order to get a force, a Lorentz force, a total Lorentz force that is exactly equal to the drag force due to the atmosphere.
So this is a very promising application for typically space stations on orbit around the Earth.
This is a summary of the electrodynamic application of a tether.
In this case we have kind of a space station here, elementary space station here, no longer the Shuttle.
The Shuttle was used and we'll talk about that later to test the system but the promising application is obviously for space stations and on the left hand side you have the use of the system as a electrical generator, which wouldn't be really too useful for space station because you have plenty of solar power and using solar arrays is a much better way to get electricity or electrical power in a space station then using a tether, however, the use as an electric motor or a thrust is a very promising application.
As we mentioned before, under the first application used the Faraday induction law and the second application uses Lorentz expression integrated along the whole length of the tether.
In the early 80s of our century, we had two Italian scientists
Professor Colombo Giuseppe, 
Colombo from Padova, Italy and Mario Grossi from the Smithsonian Astrophysical 
Observatory in the United States but an Italian also, who suggested to NASA and to the Italian Space Agency to test this concept of an electrical power generation using tethers and the idea at that time we didn't have the Shuttle flying even in the late 70s that the proposal was done,
Shuttle started to fly in 1981 and the idea was to have this collaboration between the Italians and the US to do a deployment of a long tether.
The plan was for 20 kilometers upwards from the Space Shuttle.
In order to verify the electrical power generation it was going to be a conducting tether, electrical conducting tether, altitude about 300 kilometers.
So well within the ionosphere and on the low inclination orbit.
The idea was to go on the lowest possible inclination orbit from Kennedy space center, which the latitude of
Kennedy space center, 
28.5 degrees.
So the conditions were there to really test properly the capability of this system to generate electrical power but another objective of the mission was really to see how we could control such a system.
It's not obvious to properly control a satellite at the end of a flexible tether deploying upwards and then controlling the whole geometry and dynamics of the tether, at the same time as generating electricity through the induction effect as I described before.
Here you see it's not up to scale.
The altitude was going to be only 300 kilometers and the radius of the Earth is 6,300 kilometers but that's the principle that was agreed and the mission eventually flew at STS 46 in 1992.
Was repeated then in 1996 as STS 75 and I had the privilege of being there on these two missions.
