Hello everyone.
Today we'll talk about electrical power source for various spacecraft.
On this first diagram, you see the kind of value that you have for different spacecraft.
It doesn't go really in the historical sense from the top to the bottom, but right now you still have CubeSat that have very low power.
But it gives you the range.
On the horizontal axis you have the power in watts.
And this is a log scale of the values here,
0.1 10 1000 and 100,000 here.
So, note that this is on a log scale.
Values to look at are for instance, for the CubeSats which are quite common now, it's typically a few watts.
The International Space Station, with the big four solar arrays that it has at the end of a sided truss generates on the average 84 kilowatts.
This is an average between day and night, of course, you have eclipse about a third of the time.
At any given time, they produce quite a bit more than that, but that's average value over the day.
Other values to note are
Hubble, 2.4 kilowatts, and the Space Shuttle had three fuel cells generating each about 7 kilowatts for a maximum of 21.
Although most of the time we're using about two-thirds of that.
Here we have the operating regimes of spacecraft power sources just to see what kind of power source you need for different utilizations.
You have the duration of the mission on the horizontal axis, and the electrical power in watts on the vertical axis with values of 1 kilowatt here, 10 kilowatts.
And you see if you have a mission with a short duration you need no more than about 1 kilowatt--batteries are fine.
If you want quite a bit more power and for one reason or another you don't want to use solar arrays and quite a longer duration-- fuel cells are fine.
I will give you some examples of that.
Solar arrays are widely used obviously, as a power source for long duration and pretty high values of power.
Nuclear reactors which you see here are really not used now, it's kind of a dream, but it hasn't been used so far.
And for spacecraft that need long duration and not too much power, and especially the ones that are sent far away in the Solar System when solar arrays cannot be used efficiently, we use RTGs, or radioisotope thermal electric generators.
Now, just for information, the Space Shuttle was about here.
It was typically a one or two week operation, and I mentioned already, 21 kilowatts.
The International Space Station of course, in terms of time, it's very long time, and is 84 kilowatts, so it's about at this level.
So, ISS solar arrays,
Space Shuttle was in the area of fuel cells, and that was used on the Shuttle.
No solar arrays on the Shuttle because we needed to have the flexibility of maneuvering the spaceship, and obviously, if you have solar arrays, you have a complication with the orientation of the solar arrays versus the body of the spacecraft.
Solar energy, obviously, very widely used for space stations in particular and many spacecraft on orbit around the Earth because we're close enough to the Sun with the 1.4 kilowatt per square meter solar constant.
Valid also for spacecraft that go in the Solar System but not too, too far.
If you want to go to Pluto or beyond, or Voyager I and II that are coming outside of the Solar System, obviously, you can't use solar arrays.
The principle is well known: you have the Sun, you have solar panels generating electricity out of the radiation power from the Sun.
You have a charge controller that will distribute the electrical energy generated by the solar arrays either to the batteries to load them, so that we are ready for the orbital night, and also to power subsystems,
So there is a distribution of the electrical power in these two branches.
And of course, if we are in eclipse, not illuminated by the Sun, then the batteries are providing power to the subsystems.
Now, this is an important diagram here.
You see the definition of the beta angle.
The beta angle is the angle for spacecraft on orbit around the Earth between the plane of the orbit and the direction of the Sun.
If you have a beta angle of zero, the Sun is in the plane of the orbit.
So you'll be for a while illuminated by the Sun, and then you come in the shadow.
If you have a beta angle of 90 degrees, you are flying over the determinator, in a way, the limit day and night of the surface of the Earth; in this case, you'll be constantly illuminated by the Sun.
So, in terms of planning for the electrical power generator for a spacecraft, you need to consider the beta angle and in fact, the beta angle is changing all the time.
For the International Space Station for instance, the beta angle is changing because you have the precession of the orbit, you have seasonal changes, so that the angle is changing.
But that's an important parameter in terms of the capability to store energy during the orbital day, and use it during the night.
Let's look at the principle of functioning of solar cells.
Here you have silicon, you have an n-type silicon, you have a junction, and then p-type silicon at the bottom.
And generally, you have a semiconductor with N doping on the top and P doping at the bottom.
When the solar cell is illuminated by the Sun, you have a motion of electrons from N to P and holes from P to N generating electricity.
So this is an overall principle.
And cell types, you have a silicon-based solar cell which is very common, not extremely efficient.
You get to values of 15 to 22 % for the highest efficiency silicon solar cells.
A widely used type is a gallium arsenide.
You have for instance, the Hubble Space Telescope solar arrays that are equipped with gallium arsenide cells with a quite a bit high efficiency of 30%, but a higher cost also.
Here we have some drawings about the type of geometry of the solar cells, and for the deployment a rigid foldout panels that are unfolding.
You have the flex rollouts.
Here you have another type of flex rollout radially away from the axis of the spacecraft.
And here you have a flex foldout with a mechanical structure that will extend the wings of the solar array.
This one here is the type of solar array that was used originally for the Hubble Space Telescope built in Europe by British Aerospace in Bristol, United Kingdom.
You have two bistem cassettes.
They were deploying semi-rigid bistems pretty much like a metallic tape measure that has a curvature and gives it a sort of rigidity.
And here you see the bistem being deployed on both sides and on the other side of the wings of the solar array also.
And the consequence of this semi-rigid system is that the original solar arrays of Hubble were not actually flat.
They had this slight deformation as you see on the upper right picture.
It worked fine.
Again, if you have a small deviation versus the perfect angle of exposure of the solar array to the Sun like 5-10 degrees, it's not a problem.
Batteries: types and characteristics.
Obviously, all of the batteries used in spacecraft have to be rechargeable batteries.
They are typically used during the eclipse or in orbit around the Earth, and then when we are exposed to the Sun, they are being recharged using typically the solar arrays.
Originally, we had a lot of use of the Nickel Cadmium batteries until about the year 2000.
They have been widely replaced by the Lithium Ion batteries with a much better specific energy, about 150 watt-hour per kilogram.
The original Nickel Cadmium specific energy was about 50 to 60, no more.
Now, a type of battery that is used when we need a very long duration
--typically, it's the case for the Hubble Space Telescope which has been for more than 25 years in orbit and also the International Space Station about 12 years-- it's the Nickel Hydrogen battery.
The efficiency is somewhat less than the Lithium Ion; typically, also of the order of 50 to 60 watt-hour per kilogram, but they can take a very large number of charge and discharge cycles; here up to 20,000.
Fuel cells are used whenever the utilization of solar arrays is not adequate.
For instance, if you go far away in the Solar System or for other reasons, like on the surface of Mars, where deposition of dust on the solar arrays reduces the efficiency over time.
On the left-hand side, you have the principle of the fuel cell.
You have hydrogen from the left and oxygen from the right, through respectively, anode and cathode with electrolytes.
Then you have hydrogen ions migrating from the anode to the cathode and generating electricity.
You need the constant flow of oxygen and hydrogen so the fuel cells, as opposed to normal batteries, are using a flow of reactants in order to generate the electrical power.
The by-products, as we can see, are water and heat.
In the case of the Space Shuttle that was equipped with three fuel cells, the water was obviously, used for cooling components; it was used by the crew; and for heat re-hydration of the food also.
And the heat was also used.
So, in any spacecraft system, you try to use whatever you can from any given system.
Here you generate electricity, you generate water that you use, and heat that you use also.
On the right-hand side, you see one of three Shuttle fuel cells.
Each of them was generating about 7 kilowatts of electrical power for a grand total of 21 kilowatts.
Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators,
RTGs, are used mainly in spacecraft for the exploration of the Solar System.
The idea is to use a radioactive material such as plutonium-238 generating heat.
The heat is converted into electricity by <i>thermocouples</i>.
So you need to have really a hot component which is the fuel itself, the radioactive fuel, and you have to have a cold component so that you can have a thermocouple effect.
On the left-hand side, you have the Viking spacecraft which was on the surface of Mars in the middle of the 70s with radioisotope fuel here, which is in the core of the system.
And then the outside was really the cold component with the wings that were dissipating heat in the outside so the outside was the cold part and the inside obviously, with the plutonium-238 was a hot part.
RTGs are very reliable.
They don't generate a very large amount of power, but they are very reliable, and obviously, they last a very long time.
On the right-hand side, you have a view of the top of the Curiosity spacecraft on the surface of Mars.
And you see here, the RTG, with the wings that I showed before in the case of the Viking spacecraft.
