My name is Hitoshi Kuninaka.
I received a PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1988, and I was promoted to Associate Professor and Full Professor in JAXA Aerospace Exploration Agency in Japan, in 2000 and 2005 respectively.
Now, I'm the Director of Space Exploration
Innovation Hub Center of JAXA.
In the... my academic experience,
I research plasma interaction of satellites, and develop electric propulsion.
I have several chances to participate in the satellite project.
One of them is the... we call it:
Space Flyer Unit (SFU) from 1988 to 1996.
This satellite, SFU, was launched by H-II rocket from Tanegashima Space Center,
Japan in 1995, and one year later, it came back to Cape Canaveral, US, in 1996 by Space Shuttle STS-72 successfully.
I have researched and invented the microwave discharge ion engine, which made Hayabusa Explorer round-trip space mission between Earth and an asteroid from 2003 to 2010.
And then, after that, we started another space mission that we call Hayabusa 2.
I took charge of the development of Hayabusa 2 Asteroid Explorer as a project manager.
That's all.
So, Hayabusa Asteroid Explorer was a technological demonstration mission, so new engineering challenges in those days were: first one is the autonomous operation at the far-away space from us.
Second one is the deep space communication.
Third one is the navigation technology for the long journey between Earth and the asteroid.
Number four: high efficient space propulsion system.
Number five: landing on the surface of the asteroid.
Number six: sample collecting method; and number seven is the reentry capsule technology from space to Earth and so on.
The total weight is about 500 kg.
That is maybe small... equivalent to a small car, it was the smallest spacecraft in deep space.
It was... I have already said that Hayabusa is the technology demonstration mission, so that Hayabusa was not really particular about a target asteroid.
Selection criteria of the asteroid is to ensure the outward and inward journey from the Earth and the asteroid.
Then, so that we select the asteroid Itokawa, which is an S-type asteroid, that is a very ordinary asteroid in the group of the near-Earth asteroid.
That is a very average and ordinary S-type asteroid.
That is a brief introduction, explanation of the Hayabusa mission.
Hayabusa was launched
May 9th 2003, and after that, the return on ion engine in space, and we executed the pod cruise in deep space.
One year later,
May 19th 2004, the spacecraft executed the Earth swingby.
Using the Earth's gravity field, the spacecraft accelerated much more, and then so, spacecraft Hayabusa traveled to target asteroid, and then so, it succeeded to rendezvous with the asteroid
September 12th 2005.
And then, so first of all, we observed the target asteroid in the way of the remote sensing, and then, we decided to touching point, and then so we executed the first touchdown operation
November 20th 2005.
And then so after that, one week later,
November 26th, we executed the second touchdown, but in space operations, we had a lot of trouble, and then so we lost communication with the spacecraft on December 8th 2005.
But fortunately, we resumed communication one month... one point five months later
January 23rd 2006.
And then, so we resumed the operation of the Hayabusa, and then we successfully turned on the ion engine again, and then we started the return journey from the asteroid to Earth.
And then, so finally,
June 13th 2010, we succeeded in the retrieval operation of Hayabusa.
That is the chronology of the operation of the Hayabusa mission.
So I believe... I think we established the new observation scheme: that is the asteroid sample return.
So in the conventional way of space mission, first of all, we decided to deduct matter and a method on the basis of the hypothesis, and then we developed a lightweight, small volume, low power, very expensive, on board scientific instrument, which will be installed on board the spacecraft and convoyed to the target asteroid, and then we get the data.
So that is the conventional scheme for space science, but on the other hand, asteroid sample return observation is completely different.
We collect the sample from the asteroid, and bring it back to Earth.
And then, the collected sample will be brought into the ground based, huge, high accurate, various kinds of analytical machines, just like X-Rays, tomography, or electron microscopes, and so on, so that the analytical method is completely different.
And I would like to say that this method has a very good advantage.
So if we consider the ten years later, these analytical machines will be improved much more, so that the collected sample will be devoted, and again such improved machines in the sense that we can get other data, these are the advantages of the asteroid sample return method,
I believe.
I'm working in the field of Earth-space science and space technology.
But these fields are very very narrow topics in general.
But the Hayabusa return expanded the knowledge and experience of not only space scientists, but also of the general public.
A lot of people in Japan as well internationally were glad, very glad of the return of Hayabusa.
One of the phenomena of our evidence, full movies about the Hayabusa story including one with Twentieth Century Fox were made.
So we were very surprised with this phenomena.
But it was a very good experience.
Ah yes, so my academic field is around the research and development of electrical propulsion.
In this work, I invented a new ion engine system dedicated for Hayabusa.
I took charge of the development and operations of the ion engine on board Hayabusa.
I had another task at the capsule return operation at the final phase.
I was the team leader of the delegation to Australia for the recovery operation of the capsule.
Yes, so conventional ion engines generate plasma using the direct current discharge.
But in this scheme, so lifetime and endurance are limited associated with the discharge electrodes, so this device, discharge electrode, has some troubles, but our system, the microwave discharge ion engine generates plasma by means of the microwave power without discharging electrodes.
I eliminated all the discharge electrodes and prolong the life of the system, ensuring the system's reliability, so that the microwave ion discharge engine is a different system... a new system.
That is one of the challenges.
Yes, I have already explained to you that the follow-on mission from Hayabusa, that is the Hayabusa 2.
From 2011, we started to develop Hayabusa 2 as the next asteroid sample return mission.
So the new spacecraft Hayabusa 2 also takes the ion engine system as the main propulsion.
Hayabusa 2 was successfully launched
December 2014, and now it executes a space voyage to asteroid Ryugu, a new asteroid.
Same technology of the ion engine system was applied to Hayabusa 2.
So space technology and electric propulsion, they are very challenging fields, so that here I want to challenge to the new field,
I think my spirit of challenge makes me so.
