Hello and welcome to this course on municipal solid waste management in developing countries.
My name is Chris Zurbrügg, I am a researcher at Eawag.
Eawag is the Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology.
At Eawag, I work in the department of Sanitation, Water and
Solid Waste for Development abbreviated by Sandec.
I have over 18 years of research and practical experience on various issues involving the topic of solid waste management in low income countries. 
This course is the third in a series of e-learning initiatives jointly developed by Sandec at the Eawag and EPFL.
The series covers the full range of Sandec research activities.
For more information on other courses, please visit our website.
With this first short introductory module, I would like to introduce you to the 5-week course program on municipal solid waste management in developing countries.
And on the way, we would like to present it to you in a series of video lectures, in video quizzes and exercises.
We designed this course for quite a broad audience.
The main requirement for taking this course is that you are excited and passionate about this topic.
You might be a student or a practitioner working in an NGO or as a consultant or even in national or local government.
Our hope is that with this course, you, wherever you are and whatever you do, can make a change for the better.
This change is desperately needed.
Increasing population and urbanization results in increasing waste generation.
Most cities are finding it difficult not only to cope with the existing situation but also to anticipate future trends and prepare and plan for this.
No or unreliable waste collection results in waste accumulating in neighborhoods and endangers public health.
Deficient treatment or disposal severely pollutes the environment and contributes to global warming.
Before describing the program, let us first look at the learning objectives of this course.
We hope that, after this course, you understand the current situation and relevance of municipal solid waste management.
Remember, this course focuses on low and middle income countries and does not provide much information regarding waste management in OECD countries. Besides this overall understanding, at the end of the course, you should be able to comprehend the key issues of waste management, which on one hand covers the physical elements, starting with waste generation collection transport treatment and/or recycling, and landfill disposal as well as the role of stakeholders, key management issues, as well as governments and financial aspects.
Besides understanding the challenges, you will learn about appropriate and already applied solutions through selected case studies.
So at the end of the course, you should also know what can be done and how to improve the situation.
The course will give a lot of space to organic waste treatment.
And after the various modules on organic waste treatment, you should know about the basic principles of each and have a good understanding of the pros and cons of each option.
Finally you should be able to understand some selected broader issues.
Now I shall pass the word to
Imanol Zabaleta to introduce you to the concepts that underlie the framework of this course.
Thanks Chris. Hi, my name is Imanol Zabaleta.
I'm a researcher and project coordinator at Eawag working together with Chris at Sandec and also dealing with issues pertaining to solid waste management in developing countries.
As Chris mentioned, waste management does not only involve the waste related services and infrastructure.
It also involves people, their behavior and interactions, money, laws and other aspects which are often overlooked or neglected.
Having a comprehensive and well-structured overview of all aspects involved in solid waste management and their interactions is therefore of utmost importance.
The integrated sustainable waste management framework shown here behind me provides such an overview.
This framework which was developed in the 80's has been iteratively improved since then.
The most recent version of the framework, shown here, consists of two overlapping triangles that represent two sides of a solid waste management system: the hardware of the system, also called physical components, and the software of the system, the governance aspects.
This framework is becoming the norm in discussion and assessment of solid waste management systems in different countries but especially in low and middle income countries.
We will use this framework throughout the course as our backbone.
We adapted it into this animated figure.
In week 1, after discussing the relevance and importance of this course, we will focus on the physical elements in the municipal solid waste management chain.
That covers generation, collection, treatment, triple R components, reduce, reuse and recycle, and disposal.
Week 2, we will then focus on the governance aspects covering various stakeholders involved with their roles and responsibilities, financial mechanisms as well as institutional and policy aspects.
Week 3 and 4, we will then tackle the different options for treating organic waste. Throughout the course, we will also refer to it as biowaste, organic material and biodegradable waste.
And finally week 5, we will conclude with modules on selected broader issues such as circular economy, strategic planning, performance benchmarking and the link between the waste and climate change.
Given the time available, these courses will not be able to provide a larger level of details on the wide range of topics in municipal solid waste management.
Our goal is to get you really excited about the topic and wanting much more.
In the various video modules therefore we will refer to readings on specific subjects which typically can be downloaded on the internet for free or else are available on our website.
And remember that learning is fun, and when sharing with others then the added value of learning significantly increases.
In that sense, we really welcome you to join the forum.
In the forum, you can share your experiences from your hometown, from your travels and discuss these issues together with other colleagues enrolled in the course.
The course has quizzes during the videos and homework quizzes.
Take these to test your learning.
We look forward to working with you on this course.