We saw in the 2 last lessons that the vectorization of data represents a considerable, tedious work, and that the automation of this process allows only partially to save the effort that must be made.
It is therefore quite important when data have been digitalized and entered to make them available to as many users as possible.
This is why most international organizations, most countries provide elaborated data sets more and more often particularly in the context of national geodata infrastructures.
This lesson will therefore focus on these sources of geodata and their consultation and integration into GIS projects.
The objectives of this lesson are to offer you a guided tour of the main areas in which we find
Internet data sets so that at the end of the lesson you are able on one hand to go to look for these data sets even if web addresses can be changed in the meantime so to go looking for these data sets but also to integrate them into a GIS project in the QGIS software.
Data sources include
2 types of data which we will address successively.
Firstly the data available on geoservers and then the data available for download amongst which we will distinguish digital model data of altitude, satellite imagery, physical geography data and human geography data.
The data available on geoservers are therefore geodata accessible by Internet in a client-server architecture.
The client is usually a web browser and the server a remote machine that houses a software that is able to listen to the traffic on the Internet network and respond to queries.
The requests are sent by a browser as a HTTP chain and the geoserver  is a software capable of sending back geodata either in a vectorial form or in an image form in response to such requests.
The transfer of images or rasters that represent large Internet data volumes represents an obstacle hence the use of tile decomposition of these images.
The principle of this decomposition relies on the definition of a certain number of set zoom levels and at each new zoom level the previous image which is a small image of 
256 pixels on the side is divided in 4 and again in 4 at the next zoom levels.
The different tiles are numbered but unfortunately with slightly different systems for Google, TMS and Quadtree.
We see that in the case of Google the numbering starts at the top on the left with a decreasing Y axis whilst in the TMS case, we start at the bottom on the left with an increasing Y axis.
The tiling can be performed automatically by the geoservers softwares and the user simply drops the complete image on the server or this tiling can be done manually using a Gdal2tile tool which is part of the Gdal toolbox accessible on this Internet address.
The geoservers softwares provide their tiles series in the form of WMS and WFS services.
WMS for Web Map Service and WFS for Web Feature Service, in the first case we transfer images and in the second case vectorial objects.
Access to these web services involves the use of configured HTTP requests with a number of keywords in particular the type of request which in the case of the WMS, can be a capacity request, what is the server able to send as data layer in particular, of research for a specific card, of information research on the objects that compose this map.
In the case of WFS servers, we find the same principle but with slightly different functionalities including queries that search this time, and in certain cases when editing is possible, some requests which allow to block the editing of an object and to record a transaction so a modification of this object.
Amongst the other settings, the layers to be selected, the area of ​​interest, the format of the objects that we want to have in return either jpeg, png image format for maps or GML, GeoJSON format for vectorial objects.
We have here a QGIS project that represents the Lausanne region.
We add the browser that allows to access the file tree and there we find a heading that inventories the WMS services.
A new WMS connection is created which is documented with a name and with an address which is the HTTP address of the Swiss Federal 
Administration servers.
This connection is added to the list of connections and, when we selected... when we select it we send a query of GET Capacity type to retrieve the list of available layers on this service and we see that amongst these layers, here we have a layer ...
Mosaic Landsat that gives a satellite picture ... at a low resolution.
Amongst these different layers, we also see here the canton borders layer, of different Swiss cantons.
We see in this list of available services a heading that inventories the Web Feature Services and we will also add here a new WFS connection type which is about the canton of Neuchâtel so we will call it "Neuchâtel" and then we paste the address at which this service is available.
Similarly a first click will ... lead to load the available data layers and we see that the data layer available, the only available it is the layer of municipalities of the canton of Neuchâtel.
Here, it appears.
We then see that by right clicking on this municipality layer we access its attributes, its attribute table and we see that it is indeed a vectorial layer with objects whose only available attribute is the identifier.
These objects can be selected or consulted with the information access tool and we see that in the information available, we find the properties of a vectorial object namely the perimeter and the area since it is a polygon.
The virtual globes are a special category of data accessible by geo-server with as main sources
OpenStreetMap here for the city of Dakar,
Google maps in map and satellite image version,
Bing maps, so the Google equivalent product of Microsoft,
MapQuest which is another cartography source of map type,
Yahoo maps also in satellite image,
Yandex maps of russian servers and finally the maps provided by ArcGIS online.
The integration of these different virtual globes data sources in QGIS goes through the OpenLayer plugin which is usually installed automatically. we see that we have here the list of the different... the list is not necessarily complete but a list of a certain number of virtual globes that can be added to the map, here first the OpenStreetMap map for the island of Mahe in the Seychelles and satellite image of Bing.
So if we zoom in a little in the area of ​​the capital, Victoria, we see the details of these images and map.
This OpenStreetMap plugin is an extension that is automatically installed as I said but which must sometimes be installed on foot, it is, like all extensions, in this "extensions" menu.
Finally we find various tools on Internet which allow to download the tiles of these virtual globes maps and to amalgamate them into a mosaic to achieve a complete picture. we see here an example of a commercial software which enables to recover almost all the tiles of all the types of virtual globes that I evoked earlier with different levels of zoom and then we define an area of ​​interest by these coordinates in latitude and longitude.
Besides the virtual globes, downloading data are about digital models of altitude.
First, data from the Aster satellite from 30 m of resolution which are accessible on the two sites mentioned here.
These sites offer an interface in which we can choose the area of interest, here the Kilimanjaro area and then later retrieve different ... the different images which compose this digital model of altitude.
Another possibility, the SRTM data at 30 or 90 m resolution that come from the US space shuttle here also with an interface that allows to select an area of ​​interest and then to recover the corresponding digital model of altitude.
We see that the differences in resolution translate into differences in granularity of the obtained model.
Finally, altimetric data which are more about bathymetry with the Marine
Geoscience Data System which also offers an interface allowing to select an area of ​​interest and retrieve the data in different formats regarding the digital model of altitude including the submarine model.
The satellite imagery field is a bit special in the sense that the high-resolution images are generally provided by commercial companies.
The images available and freely accessible are generally of a lower resolution in the order of 10 m for Sentinel images and 30 m for Landsat images, up to 15 m for the panchromatic band in the latter case.
In the easily accessible images amongst the best sites the Copernicus website of the
European Space Agency,
Earth Explorer of the
US Geological Service, or the Global Data Explorer of the same service, or the NASA Reverb site.
In the 4 cases we have an interface which allows to select an area of ​​interest on a map and then to explore the different product types provided by different satellites and various measuring instruments for different years and in different periods of the year.
Commercially, many very high resolution images that are sold and often very expensive with GeoEye satellites which have very very low resolutions
34 cm for the best,
Worldview, the Pleiades satellites of the European Space Agency
QuickBird, Ikonos, etc. etc.
Many companies provide or sell these images, the one mentioned here is only one amongst all these companies.
It has the advantage of providing almost all the range of existing high resolution images.
In the physical geography field, first for general data, the GEOSS site, which is an access portal to a large number of information sources then the Natural Earth site.
This website offers both raster and vector data for different topics which are related to physical geography.
In the climatic weather field, we have Worldclim which provides globally fairly high resolution maps of climatic parameters, the average rainfall for the year, for different months of the year, temperatures, etc.
Hydrosheds, which provides catchment basins and hydrographic networks of the waterways for all the catchment basins of the planet and the Global Land Ice Measurements, which provides information on all the glaciers, as we can see here the different glaciers of the western Switzerland alps.
For the ground we have Soilgrids and Globcover for the ground cover and the Landcover layer of Climate Change Initiative which actually took over from Globcover.
In the field of environment, forests with the percentage of forest cover, the data provided by the United Nations
Environment Program and data from the US Agency for
Environmental Protection.
Finally in the field of ​​resources, we have a portal for geology and here a site that constitutes a global observatory of energy.
In the field of human geography, we find general data on the Natural Earth site including the administrative limits data: public places, urban areas, transport infrastructure, etc.
Again, the United Nations Program on Environment site which contains many data particularly in relation with the population or with socio-economic themes.
Other useful sources of information from the human geography perspective, it is all the maps provided by the World Bank and finally the center of application and socioeconomic data related I believe to NASA which is found here.
For more targeted thematic we find Worldpop for the population and for toponymy, the Geonames site with here a selection of toponyms from Ghana and for the administrative limits,
Global Administrative Areas, a site that provides the administrative limits of level 0 so national and of level 1 - 2 - 3 for the subdivisions, by districts, by municipalities, etc. etc.
So, we have looked at the different types of data sources that are found on the Internet either in the form of geo-server, of web service or in the form of data accessible for download.
We have also seen how these different types of data could be integrated to GIS projects in QGIS.
