When we implement an algorithm, i.e, when writing the code that describes the algorithm, there are parts that are repeated several times similarly.
We define a loop.
Loops can be written as, doing this for an index that is from 5 to 10 for example.
In this case we use a For loop "for".
Another possibility is to continue to execute a block of command, while a condition is true.
This is called a While loop.
So as long as something is true, do this.
Imagine you're writing a function that sums numbers between A and B.
So, we will edit this function.
As always, we must start with the keyword function.
What is it going to make this function?
The sum. We will call this function,
"For Loop Test".
And we will take as input the boundaries
A and B.
For the test, sum the numbers between
A and B.
We begin by defining the variable sum equal to zero.
And then we'll make a loop to I going from A to B.
And each time, we'll do the sum that is equal to the sum plus the variable I.
We end the block of the loop and end the function.
So we can do the test.
For Loop Test, we must give two numbers.
The sum of the numbers between 1 and 3 is 1 plus 2 plus 3 equals 6.
And we can do the sum of the numbers ranging from les than 10 to 10.
And we get 0 since negative 10 plus 10 equals 0, negative 9 plus 9 is 0, etc.
Another possibility is to use while loops.
Now, we write a function that will continue to ask the user to enter a number until it has guessed a selected number. So we call the function with the parameter number and inside, there is a loop.
First, it must be able to ask the user for a number.
How do we do it ?
We say Guess equals the Input.
Input is a feature that allows us to display a message, for example, guess the number.
We ask the user to enter the number.
So if I save like this.
I can call While Test, and say I would like the user to guess the number 5. So we enter the number and it stops immediately.
Already, we should say if the number is the one asked, then we can write congratulation.
When we call While Test 5, we renter 3, you have nothing.
And when we get 5, we are told congratulation.
But here we appealed to Input once.
We made no loop.
So what woul we like?
We would like to say as long as what we guess is different from the number, we ask again to re-enter a number.
And once that number is guessed, we stop the loop.
Now, if we do While Test 5.
So we ask the lawmakers to re-enter the number 5.
We try, it gives 3, we try again, this is not good, we try again.
And at some point, we get 5.
We can get out of the loop and have the congratulation message.
In the exercises, there will building of loops that are more complicated than the latter.
Here are the basics.
Then we must enrich the block located between While and End to perhaps help the user saying, no, it's bigger, no, it is smaller.
So you need to put If, after requesting the number to the user.
And this is in the exercises.
One possibility to interrupt a
For loop and While, is to use the keyword Break.
So, say you want to let the user only 5 trials.
I'll set the maximum number of tests,
Max Number of Tries.
That, I say, there are a maximum of 5.
And now, we tried once, because we have already asked the user once. In the loop, we must increase the number of tests. We say
Tries equals Tries + 1.
And check if the number of tests is greater than the maximum number of defined tests, so we'll go out.
And for this, we use the keyword Break.
The problem is that at the very end, we need to test to see if we did get the number.
So again,Guess has to be equal to the requested number, then we display congratulation.
Otherwise, we will display the sorry.
And we can finish If.
So we used several features that we studied.
Now, if we test our function, we want to guess the number 6.
Then, we try once, twice, three times, four times, five times.
And it shows us congratulation, because I have defined 6 the last.
Now I can reduce the number of tests.
We can also see with just two tests.
And ask to guess the number 10.
So I take for example 3, 4.
And there it stops, So it asked thrice and then it stopped.
Why three? Because first, it asked once outside of the While loop, and twice within the While loop.
So if we really want to have two tests, then we must change and say that Max number of
Tries is 1.
And in this case, there will be only two tests.
Once exercised these features, you will be able to build a program.
The next chapter is the construction of a program where you will use several functions, and inside the functions, there will be loops, there will be conditions, and also calculations to do.
