Hi. Ambassador Manuel Bessler,
Vice Director, delegate for humanitarian aid, and head of the Swiss
Humanitarian Aid Unit.
During his career, Ambassador Bessler worked for the ICRC, the United Nations Protection Force, and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the United Nations.
During this interview,
Ambassador Bessler will tell us about why DRR is an essential requirement for SDC and what types of cooperation
Switzerland has in the field of science and technology for DRR.
For the Swiss humanitarian aid, it is very important to prepare... to prepare for what is coming, to prepare for disasters because we will have a next earthquake, we will have a next drought or flooding.
And we even know where most probably this next disaster will happen, so why don't we prepare?
Why don't we build the dams higher or stronger or the building resistant to earthquake?
In this sense, it's not only cheaper to invest in disaster risk reduction, it's also the right thing to do.
Well, we do invest about one-sixth of our budget in prevention and this goes from very technical cooperation to strategic projects.
Disaster risk reduction has a technical component, be it radar alarm system, be it satellite imagery, be it telecommunication.
In order to limit the impact of disaster, you have to know them, you have to know the risks, you have to know where flooding will strike, or where are the fault lines for a potential earthquake.
So risk mapping is something very essential to an effective DRR.
In this sense, you need technology.
For this you have to know where are the weak points, and there, we have very concrete examples.
For instance, the sensoring of water levels of rivers-- that they can then give the alert to downstream communities to evacuate in order to prevent disaster.
We have risk maps of avalanches, of potential landslides.
For instance, in Armenia we had very successful cooperation with the authorities in order to prevent residential buildings in landslide-exposed areas.
So there, technology is key.
And there, obviously, we have to reach out to partners.
We need the expertise and the experience from universities, from Center of Competences to help us in order to prepare.
Look, the main thing is disaster, destroy, development gains and with DRR you protect development.
In this sense, you help reach sustainable development goals so DRR and SDGs are very closely linked.
And to improve this, to protect this link, we have to invest more and more in DRR.
