Hello. In this video I will present a general overview of funding for science and technology for DRR, some elements that need to be in place to make progress towards effective funding schemes for DRR research, science and technology, and some examples of funding sources.
According to a 2015 publication of the Overseas Development Institute, between 1991 and 2010, only a small part of the development assistance was dedicated to DRR.
Concerning specifically funding for science and technology for DRR, there are global differences in the way research and resources are aligned.
According to Reid Basher's publication of 2013, the funding for DRR science and technology is mostly undertaken by national, publicly funded institutions.
For instance, universities and government agencies.
The focus of the research and funding is often concentrating on the most frequent hazards.
Integrated DRR, complex hazards, and future risk lack sponsorship.
There is more natural science than social science on vulnerability or multidisciplinary research.
There appear to be limited resources to investigate risk and resilience.
On the other hand, government aid agencies may limit their research to applied research to fulfil their mandates.
The Sendai Framework 2015-2030 calls for more effectiveness of funding investments to support DRR innovation, identify research gaps, and prioritize research areas appropriately.
It also identifies the need to optimize national and international cooperation in relation to resourcing research, and facilitating its uptake.
In the next slides, 
I will present a few examples of research funding resources.
Although we cannot include all funding opportunities for science and technology for DRR in this video, and many of you know these and other research funding sources, we thought it important to show you some of the existing opportunities.
According to the publication by Aitsi-Selmi et al. in 2016, several platforms have been developed to encourage national, international, or transectorial research.
These platforms connect research providers and research users.
We can name, for example, IRDR,
Future Earth, the Belmont Forum, and the Newton Fund.
There are also other resources, funds, and partnerships that exist.
For example, AXA, a French insurance company manages a research funding instrument.
Also, the Global Resilience Partnership that aims to accelerate promising technologies and ideas to build resilience of families, communities, countries, and regions.
In 2014, the European Commission funding opportunities launched a call for research on disaster resilience, safeguarding and securing society, including adapting to climate change.
The need for a more strategic coordination of investments was also discussed during the UNISDR
Science and Technology Conference in 2016.
Specifically, participants contemplated tools and mechanisms for coordinating funders and their role in increasing research capacity in countries with more limited research infrastructure.
During the conference, a participant emphasized the need to think about <i>investing</i> in research for DRR instead of funding research for DRR.
Investing in research for DRR strengthens the message that DRR is essential because it is closely linked to a broader, sustainable development agenda.
In this video we saw that there is relatively little investment towards research for DRR in general, and risk and resilience in particular.
And that we need to start thinking about investing in research for DRR in order to bring a broader sustainable development agenda forward.
