Pedestrians/cars.
So we've just had the choice of interior/exterior.
And also that of favoring the pedestrian or the car.
We will see that in the United Arab Emirates they favor the car, while in Southeast Asia, in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur, we find more and more-- and this is new-- that it is the pedestrian who is favored.
There is also one with city models, political choices.
What flow of people should I bring to my global city?
Should I make sure that they can take a walk in fresh air?
We have just seen interior/exterior.
Will they go out as pedestrians, or will there be more drivers in city streets? For example in Abu Dhabi, as you can see, very little space, one can nonetheless find two people who try, under umbrellas since it's so hot, to take a stroll, but one can see that, while not all paths are bad, it will be difficult to go from one point to the next because sidewalks simply do not exist, and that one can only cross vast parking lots where the cars are taking up all the space.
Ditto, and even more striking, we can imagine a bad pedestrian.
There too, passing under a walkway which one can climb to cross the street, but there is a barrier which completely blocks it from the road, so to go from one point to the next you must go back up, cross and go down on the other side.
A striking example in Dubai, where we have a pedestrian crosswalk which ends, and even if it were to continue there is no sidewalk, and even if there were, one would end up against a wall, so one can basically do nothing; one cannot take a walk in this universe, unless it is to walk on the road or ground, and try however one might to find a place to cross.
On the contrary, Malaysia offers signs for tourists, of course, to the important city landmarks, and directions to them, even indicating the time it will take to get there.
So there is a signage put in place for the pedestrian.
But, not everything is resolved in 
Kuala Lumpur, where there are path markings for the blind, so sidewalks exist.
One can walk, but there is still a slight problem, shall we say, of parking, which is done precisely in the same spot where the pedestrian should walk.
Singapore, old-style Singapore, rather like Abu Dhabi, where one had to walk on the road in order to cross, and now, little by little, all the overpasses have been upgraded, which means that in the Southeast Asian model they realize that there will be pedestrians who encounter scooters, who encounter cars, all this happening with relative ease.
On the contrary, in Dubai, in Abu Dhabi, all the different flows are separated, making it extremely difficult for the pedestrian to get from one point to another, as the flow is granted above all to the car.
Another element of our model, after interior/exterior, after car/pedestrian, is the question of homogeneity, or heterogeneity.
In European cities there is research on homogeneity.
Buildings, and large groupings of them should be similar.
Such is the rue de Rivoli in Paris, the hundreds of arcades, kilometers of the same type of buildings, always the same type.
The other way is to assume this heterogeneity.
We will see that, in Dubai as well as Abu Dhabi, via their skylines they seek a homogeneity of the image they offer to the city.
Not on the level of buildings, all very different, but on a global level, on a general level of city skyline where one finds a situation which seeks homogeneity.
On the contrary, in 
Southeast Asia, in Singapore,
Kuala Lumpur, one clearly and simply assumes this heterogeneity.
Here is an example of homogeneity.
We see more and more a skyline whose buildings have the same template, more or less, the same implementation, and one tries to be homogeneous, throughout the region.
This is where it's even more striking, even if the buildings are very different, it is the skyline which emerges.
We can remove the image and see how what emerges is that of a relatively homogeneous city.
Again, this time in Dubai, this research method of placing one line like this, across the buildings.
There are two layers of buildings, shall we say, lined up on the street, which gives them a homogeneity which can be perceived at any given moment. On the contrary, 
Singapore or Kuala Lumpur.
We will see the complete homogeneity of building methods.
We can have, as we have here, very small buildings.
We can have enormous buildings.
We can have the old, the contemporary, it matters little.
One assumes this heterogeneity, and one builds accordingly, level by level, without seeking to homogenize the area.
So here we have a vision which some might find a bit apocalyptic, with so many different and disparate elements.
But, it is a heterogeneity which is totally assumed.
Whereas in other areas, particularly in Europe, one seeks, historically, a homogeneity across the whole of the city area. 
There you have it.
Once again we have questions about models homogenous vs. heterogenous.
The last example, the question of flux vs. fluidity.
In the model of the U.A.E., what is sought is above all flux.
They seek the quantity of people, the quantity of maximum flow.
Whereas in regions of Southeast Asia, in Singapore or Kuala Lumpur, it is exactly the opposite.
It is not the flux which is of interest, but the fluidity.
Everything should be linked, it should be possible to arrive very quickly, to get off the plane, hop in a cab, arrive at one's hotel, and quickly be in one's room, all the sequences-- for the tourist, of course, because the goal is to attract people from outside, they try to reduce as much as possible these sequences for the tourist.
Here we have an example, in Abu Dhabi, where we are not certain of fluidity but yes of flow.
There are cars everywhere, an enormous mass of cars, absolutely everywhere.
And the opposite example, here in Kuala Lumpur, where we have an aerial monorail which picks up passengers here, who get on the monorail. 
The cars pass here.
We have crossing flows but it is very easy, from one's hotel, to get on the monorail, travel two stops, get off, take a bus, hop in a cab and off you go.
So each transfer, each change of means of transport is facilitated and is extremely fluid.
And this is political volition, there in the background, which ensures that it is the quickest possible.
So now we will leave Southeast Asia, and leave the Arab world.
These few elements, to help us to reflect once again, on the African city, so let's now think about Johannesburg,
Dakar, Kinshasa. 
Let's think of all these cities and imagine how they are constructed, how they are arranged.
Are we in the interior?
The exterior?
The fluidity or flux?
A pedestrian, or a car?
The answer to the question of the car is relatively simple.
We do not yet have the example of an African city specifically set up around the pedestrian.
Which is no doubt wrong, as the great majority of people are pedestrians.
We can offer as example 
Switzerland: 500 vehicles per thousand inhabitants, while Dakar must be at fewer than 30 vehicles per thousand inhabitants.
So the great majority of people get around on foot.
And it is perhaps with these people that we should begin to reflect, which is what Singapore did, and Kuala Lumpur, which is besides attracting more and more this flow of tourists, of international business travelers, this also allows those who live there to be able to get from one place to another with relative ease.
Some examples now, of models, of the American model, as we see here,
You know the huge grid found in the U.S.
This is a one-mile grid, but all the land is squared off like this.
One by one, and then as each square is added, urbanized little by little, until all the squares which remain are urbanized.
But the pattern is exactly the same everywhere.
It is a model, as you can see.
Another model, taking an example from Dakar, with its turnpike.
"A Large State Venture", 
"The Future of Amina," "Being Built Today"
They place on these great works and on the turnpikes to be constructed a future for future inhabitants.
This is not to judge the value behind it; it is simply another model, which is already in use, particularly in Dakar.
Another model, this one historic, is the plan of Nouakchott.
Nouakchott does not yet exist in its modern state, the model kept is one of segregation, between a residential North here, and a much denser, more popular South.
So in 1957, three years before independence, we still have, for a new city which will be Nouakchott, laying the first stone in 1958, for this new city for which was chosen a segregative plan, between a European city, as one once called it, residential zones for the rich, for the elite, and then a Southern zone more popular, indigenous.
This is a city model.
One was not obligated to separate the population in two.
One might have imagined that, at the same time those of the popular neighborhoods might be instead spread uniformly around the area.
Once again, not a value judgement, one does not say if this is good or bad, one simply can say that, these are choices made, and different models.
Finally, an interesting model which 
I'd like to leave with you to reflect on.
Is it better to live in this first part of the screen, on the bottom, in the market-- animated, informal, popular, or in a version of modern Africa, in a building, where one sees no one outdoors?
I leave this question hanging, we'll have the opportunity to return to it but the idea to reflect on is which model would you prefer, for which city.
We'll stop there, on the question of model.
