[Multilingual discussion]
[Music]
Moving forward.
The car has become the dominant mode of transport in the twentieth century, in contemporary societies.
And in fact the development of the car was accompanied by a series of adverse effects such as congestion, space consumption, pollution problems and in general environment problem.
And so, because of these negative elements, appeared very rapidly in fact, the obligation, the need to master the use of the automobile.
And evidently to control these automotive uses, it is important to know how users will make their choice on travel mode.
So it's a little the matter I wish to address today.
It is to try to think about how people can appropriate other modes of travel than the private car.
So these other modes of travel I have called: altermobilities.
In these altermobilities,
I especially worked on public transport, cycling and car pooling with sometimes combinations between these different modes, for example people who will use the bike to go to a station and then the train to go to their workplace and thinking about these modes of appropriation of altermobilities was conducted on the home-work trip.
So data which has been used to produce these results, these are qualitative survey data by interviews.
So these are interviews with the life story method which was made in France, so I made around fifty interviews, with an altermobilistic population on the home-travel trip.
Why using this method of life stories?
Because it allowed people to tell their life, and the various modes of travel they had used during their life.
And it allows reconstruction the time of permanence, of change, and the elements that influenced the various changes in travel patterns during the life.
Compared to these lifecycle elements, there are two great structuring periods we can identify in the life course.
So this is, firstly, the youth phase.
So the youth phase is: childhood, adolescence, and then the period when eventually we studie or not but anyway, this period where things are not yet fully structured in the lives of individuals.
And this phase of youth is characterized by experiments, and trials and errors, and therefore we find these experiments in the uses of travel modes.
So it will be, for example, a period when we will experiment the train, different uses of public transport when we will practice hitchhiking, when we will eventually borrow cars and use them more, when we will be free bicycles, etc.
This is a bit the system of resourcefulness, it is also linked to youth economic constraints which have not either necessarily money to buy a vehicle and move with it.
And so we have like that a period which may be called a modal trial and error period.
At the time of what sociologists call the passage from the entrance into adulthood, we will have, in fact, a sort of stabilization in uses of modes of travel.
So this time of entry into adulthood is characterized, in any case, by stabilization, which is both professional that is to say it will be the moment when one finishes his studies and whene one will find a job and then it is also characterized by stabilization of marriage and family perspective.
And we find this idea of ​​stabilization also, in the uses of travel modes with crystallization of these uses which will be in two main modalities.
So the first is from my point of view, the most obvious, it will be for the car that is to say that from the moment people will have obtained their driving license, then will have gained their first vehicle, it really will be a complete surrender of all modes of travel that were previously used in favor of the exclusive use of the car.
It is finally, the first method of stabilization of uses at the time of entry into adulthood.
Obviously this stabilization for the car, it is particularly visible in the generations who have become adults in the 60, 70, 80.
And then there is another modality that will be more in favor of altermobilties therefore uses that will turn completely towards altermobilistic uses upon entering adulthood.
I must say that when I made this empirical investigation,
I did not expect at all to find this result!
In fact, we see that there are people who, when their professional and domestic stabilization will adopt alternative modes whether public transport, cycling or carpooling.
How can we explain that?
So there are several elements which come into play obviously, it's related to residential territory in particular when these people live in areas that are urban and dense, also of belonging effects to social groups.
We see it very well, for example, among bicycle users which are often invested in associations or in some alternative groups and citizens in which cycling is highly valued
So suddenly, they will engage in these practices.
And it is also linked to learning effects,
So these learning effects, it will be an example a strong example of that field, this was a person who came from a large family, whose parents did not have a driving license, and was the first in his family to pass the driving license, and so she really learned to drive on this collective mode since it was she who was left in the first line to be able to accompany the family, to go shopping, to move, and therefore for her, in fact, the use of the car was necessarily linked to a collective use she then, in fact, perpetuated throughout his life.
And so we will now look into these processes of change which are relatively complex processes, that I analyzed on the home-work trip.
So they are relatively complex because they involve three element types.
First it will be provisions.
That is to say, a state of mind which places them in the disposion to change their mode of travel.
Then there will be the importance of a biographical context that is favorable to change.
And finally, the third type of elements, it will be the triggers.
So I will take each of these elements.
First of all the provisions.
They are of different orders, these provisions. there will be negative provisions with respect to the car.
So it's going to be people who are tired of using the car who face daily congestion problems, parking difficulties, possibly accidents on the road, etc.
And, suddenly, it will place them in a negative provision vis-à-vis of the car and who will say : I wish I could move otherwise!
Then we will have provisions which are positive in respect of other modes of travel.
We find it particularly in promoting cycling where it'll be, for example, people who say: me, in my daily schedule between my work and my family
I am unable to find time for sports and
I would like to use this travel time I mandatory have to go to work to use the bike, and suddenly, it would also be a way to practice a sport.
There is a third type of provision, which falls more, of a form of reflective analysis that people have on their travel purposes, and which will be linked to the consideration of issues and values environmental and ecological that is to say that these people are thinking that the use their car every day, is not very good for the environment, is not very good for the planet, and they say that ideally, they would love to do otherwise.
Then you should know that these changes, they work systematically, in biographical contexts that are favorable to change, that is to say, it will already be a biographical context where there are kinds of breaks.
These ruptures can be very different from each other, and which suddenly will allow a transformation of habits and routines, it can be very strong biographical breaks such as the spouse's death, that will completely reconfigure, of course, the person's daily organization.
It may also be disruptions linked to steps in lifestyle for example, the arrival of a child, a couple formation, a separation, children leaving the family home, etc.
And, we also have events, much more simple such as a move or a job change that will, again, reorganize, of course, the organization of the home-work trip.
And for that, really, to happen, a change as such. there must be triggers of that change.
So these triggers they are, here also very different in nature.
The first of them is what I called: the sudden or unexpected hardship.
Which means people will find themselves dealing with a broken leg that prevents them from driving facing an immobilized vehicle because it is down, it was rough, etc.
So, they will be forced to find an alternative to get to their workplace.
And so these alternatives, it will be, for example, to find a colleague who can carpool us or to use public transport, but the idea is that really compared to this sudden and unexpected constraint we must reconfigure, we have to find another solution.
The second type of triggers, that's what I called: commitment.
So here it is rather on the alter-Mobilist profiles who will be activists that is to say it's going to be people who go through this mode change of movements in alignment to their thinking and the way they do, that is to say it's going to be people for whom ecological and citizens values are very important and therefore they feel obliged to change their travel patterns to bring them into line with their values.
And the third type of triggers, it will be: the opportunity.
The opportunity is the idea that these people will change their modes of travel because they will "meet" an alternative to the car on their home-work trip.
I deliberately use the term "meet" because a part of these triggers opportinistic will be a meeting with a car-pooler, for example, it will be the meeting with a public transport alternative,
For example, following the establishment of a new transport infrastructure or a new transport service.
And so the meeting with this new possibility will trigger the change of modes of travel.
What to say about this item, also, of opportunity, is that it really is the pattern we find in changes of travel modes taking place following the establishment of mobility plan in enterprises where there really is a communication effort also on the various alternatives and suddenly, people will find available a correct alternative to their need to travel to get to work.
The question we might ask once we understood how was the change happening particularly when bound to a sudden and unexpected stress, that is to say why people will continue?
Because, once a broken leg is repaired, once I have recovered my vehicle which was being repaired,
I'll take my car, as before, and that's it !
I would have put aside alter mobility which did not for last very long and in fact it goes not quite like that, at least not in the people I met, they were alter mobilists on the long term, and the sustainability of altermobiles practices is played on several elements.
The first of them, is that the people using these alternative will realize that the journey time gives them something they had not when they were traveling by car.
That is to say that they felt there that they were wasting their time when they were driving they will, however, have the feel of a time gained, a time that is additional in their journey to work whether it is elsewhere in the use of car pooling public transport and cycling.
So it'll be a time that they are going to use to relax to discuss with others to meet other people for reading, etc.
If one is interested, in particular, in car-pooling, be aware that this element is fundamental here, it is that very often before car-pooling, people tell us:
"For me, one of the attractive elements of carpooling, is the fact of sharing my trips costs " and when questioned people who practice car pooling, this element here, it is almost forgotten the benefit of usability that is played while driving which are shared with other people; and it's really on this convivial element that is sustained the use of carpooling.
The second element, which is important to understand how these practices there can last over time, it is the question of their legitimacy.
The idea, in fact, is that we need to legitimize necessarily things that we daily make and especially when they are new practices, then these alter mobility practices they are globally legitimized by the fact that they refer to ecological values which are widely shared among the population, but sometimes, there is also the need to find other instances of legitimation, that is to say, other people other places, other spaces in which we will legitimize these practices particularly for the use of bicycles, because there are still ten years from now, cycling suffered from a relatively poor image in the population, wholesale cycling was a mode of transport for the poor or the Greens a little crazy and so people who used the bike really needed to feel they were not at the margins of society but really to legitimize this practice.
To that end they will address associations of cyclists in which they will be able to share their experiences and thus legitimize their practices.
And then the last element playing on the sustainability of these uses, is of course the creation of habits and routines, because the more you practice something and the more we become expert in this practice, we know the operation, we know how it works, we no longer need to ask thousands of questions, and suddenly it becomes easier and you no longer want, either, to find the energy to start to change in favor of something else.
Taking a little height in relation to these changes in displacement modes, there are still two issues that remain, ultimately what is of other trip purposes?
Because the journey to work is not all the trips that are made.
So when we look, there is a great diversity also in these alter mobilities uses for other trip purposes than work, and this is true, in particular, when people have a subscription to public transport which is also valid for travel in the weekend.
The second question is ... it is the question of the object "car", as such.
Finally, I no longer use it on the home-work trip ?
Do I still need to keep it or not?
And here too there is an element which is very interesting and surprising, it is that most of these alter Mobilists I met keep their vehicle because it is a kind of safety net for them, which means retaining their vehicle, which is available they are always in the mood to say: if I use something other than my car, it's because I made the choice to use it this is by no means because I am captive of these other modes of travel and therefore in case ...
I always have my car available and therefore somehow the fact to keep a vehicle is also involved in the longevity, in time, of these new travel practices.
So in conclusion we can say that there is no binary opposition between the alter mobility and self-mobility, but that alter mobility is really an enlargement of the field of possibilities regarding the use of movement, and there really is a complementarity between these different uses in everyday life.
