An ordinary morning on the highway.
A large, high, overwhelming majority of the seats are empty.
A car, a person. A car, a person.
A car, a person.
Is this reasonable?
The issue of public transport, is major.
We know that to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases,
We must act on transport, we must act on habitat and then on industries.
In transport, there is a range of possible measures, including the use of public transport or better use of existing vehicles.
So it has several small scratches, so that, is a car that lives.
Rental of vehicles between individuals, one can imagine Mr. X, who has a car. He said that he does not use it so often, and then he would the return on it a little better.
So he goes to rent it, for example on an internet platform from other users.
And generally, against remuneration.
In fact, we are a family. We live in downtown and it was realized that we had everything we needed in public transit. Therefore, using a little the car for shopping big or for the weekend, for some travel, but we almost decided not to buy another once she is out of service. We said so make it a benefit to others around us.
Day to day, having a car is not necessary, at least for me. It costs a little expensive.
To park it, it is a complicated etc.
So I know that for many people, it is also a social status, something like that, but for me, it really is a means of transportation.
Car pooling enters the collective private transports.
Here, we are in the case where a vehicle which has an owner is filled by several people. So with carpooling, one manages to increas the density of occupants per vehicle.
There must be common schedules with people going about the same place.
Okay, so this is where there is the key to the car.
Take the example of car sharing in particular.
One can imagine some households buying a whole vehicle.
It means that these people have mobility needs in relation to the vehicle relatively light, because if everyone uses it every day, it's impossible.
There, in fact, they will use this vehicle at defined times, they will work out among themselves.
Of course the costs will be divided between the number of families and the number of households.
If we thought about all the objects we use an hour a week or one hour a month, we can say that these objects, could be pooled. So this is the example of the mower, for example.
One might lend it between neighbors.
We could set this up for many things, against payment or against the exchange of another service or other property.
And that is growing tremendously and I think this is one of the forms of the assets in the future, which will grow more and more.
