Hello and welcome back. 
In this session, we will conceptualize the transition into smart urban transportation system and we do this in 3 steps. 
We will firstly identify the main 3 drivers towards such systems and then we will conceptualize the evolution of these systems and finally we will lay out the 2 main steps that it takes in order to make this transition
Now the main drivers. 
There are 3 main drivers, we think, that push towards smarter urban transportation systems.
The first one is one is, of course, urbanization.
More people living in cities.
Transport becomes more and more congested and the users have an increasingly poor experience, be it the users of the car or the bicycle or the buses and that is certainly one of the main drivers that pushes for smarter systems and the second driver is the main topic that we have always dealt with in this MOOC.
That is the digitalization that actually makes a whole series of changes that makes smarter urban transportation systems possible.
And the third driver here is climate change or resource efficiency.
Approximately 15 - 20% of global CO2 emissions actually come from urban transportation and so there is a strong push to make these systems more efficient and make them smarter. 
These 3 drivers together push towards smarter urban transportation systems.
Now how to think about this evolution and how to conceptualize this evolution?
There was transport in the cities before the car.
There were actually trams in the cities or carriages and when the car appeared, the efficiency of urban transportation initially increased but then as more and more cars entered the city, as there were more and more people using the cars, at some point the car led to some sort of counter-productivity where by more cars in the city actually led to a poorer user experience and the efficiency of urban transportation systems rapidly declined to the point where we think we are today.
So here we are at a point where digitalization and the other drivers together will lead to a paradigm shift.
We don't know yet where exactly this will lead to after but we can clearly identify the 2 elements of that paradigm shift.
The first element being the fact that people want to own
less and less things, including cars and they want to use the vehicles they want to use the transportation modes.
So, ownership to usership and the second element of that paradigm shift is the fact that we move away from separate transportation systems to mobility systems in the sense that when you become a user you actually care much less about which kind of transportation mode you use and so ultimately this leads to some sort of mobility services.
Let's now talk about the steps towards transition and we think there are 2 main steps.
So traditionally there is already quite a lot of improvement of existing transportation systems, infrastructures and service but with the new data layer, with the digitization, there are more improvements.
The existing improvements can be significantly enhanced and that will be the first step towards the transition.
The second step will be the, so called, shift pathway whereby things are done in terms of the paradigm shift I mentioned before in terms of ownership to usership and in terms of transportation mode to mobility services and the next 2 sessions will talk about these 2 steps which are conditions for making smart urban mobility systems a reality.
