Hello, and welcome back to the course.
My name is Maxime Audouin, and I am a researcher here at EPFL.
In this session, we will focus on how the ICTs can help to improve urban transportation systems, in terms of user experience and safety.
We will focus on 2 directions.
Namely, the use of the information and communication technologies to monitor urban transportation infrastructure and automated driving vehicles.
We will see that these 2 directions have implications for both public and private transportation.
The first area where digitalisation can help is in the monitoring of urban transportation systems.
Indeed, by making the transportation infrastructure equipped with data gathering devices such as video camera, speed cameras, sensors for traffic detection.
Such as infrared, laser, RFID, as well as wired, and wireless communication devices, we can now have a better understanding of the behavior of urban transportation systems.
And thus, decide to optimize them accordingly.
The use of the ICTs to monitor transportation infrastructure has direct implication, to begin in the <i>Infrastructure Layer.</I>
Indeed, transportation and infrastructure managers now have to pay attention to the integration of the legacy transportation infrastructure, with this new data infrastructure.
There are also implications in the Data layer.
Transportation infrastructure managers must pay attention to the reliability of the data.
And whether they are complete and holistic or not.
Data coming from different channels should also be easy to standardize.
Last but not least, one must be sure that the data is secure. That is to say that the data doesn't end up in the wrong hands as they might be confidential data, and should not be misused.
To finish, there are implications in the Services Layer.
Thanks to the data gathered, transportation providers can make their transportation services more accessible, performing, and respond eventually more adequately to the demand.
Where as private car users can benefit from new services such as ways allowing them to adapt their routes when driving.
For example, thanks to dynamic route planners that are using real time data.
The other direction that is contributing to improve the experience of private and public transportation users as well as the safety of urban transportation systems can be observed in the development of self driving vehicles, also known as
Automated Vehicles.
Most of the road accidents nowadays are caused because of human errors.
And having machines complete the driving task instead of humans, should it be for personal cars, or public transport vehicles, could ultimately reduce the number of accidents on the road, increase the safety of transportation systems, and ultimately make our urban transportation systems more efficient.
Another argument in favour of automated vehicles is that it would allow people to complete other tasks than the driving task when using a vehicle to go from one location to another.
That is to say, help them stop wasting their time when commuting.
Traditional vehicles, should they be cars, shuttles, buses, are already producing important amounts of data that you do not even think of.
Think about the speed of a vehicle, the direction it's headed, its location, its directions and stability control, the brake status, the hours of operation, the mileage.
Thanks to the ICTs, these data can now be used to make our vehicles more automated to go progressively towards what is known as
Self Driving Vehicles.
As agreed by The United States 
Department of Transportation, car automation can be divided into 5 steps.
Level 0, which is not a step is known as the
No Automation Level.
Level 1, which is the first step is when the driver benefits from one driving assistance system such as braking systems for example.
Level 2, is where the river benefits from at least 2 driving assistance systems.
Fr example, cruise control, and braking assistance at the same time.
Whereas these 3 first levels are enabled by automation mechanisms, the next 3 steps are enabled by a combination of automation and
ICT facilitated processing.
Level 3 is defined as the conditional automation where the driving task is completed by an automated driving system.
But it is expected that the driver responds appropriately if needed.
Such systems are currently being used on highways with for example, what Tesla is proposing in California in the United States, but not yet in urban systems due to the high complexity of traffic in town.
Level 4 is defined as the <i>High Automation</i>, which is the evolution of 
Level 3 into a stage where the human driver does not even need to respond appropriately if needed.
This is being developed, and according to Tesla still such functionalities should be available in 2018.
The last level of this automation ladder, is the level 5, known as
The Full Automation where all aspects of driving will be completed by driving assistance systems including activities such as parking.
Automated vehicles of Level 5 will not have any options for human driving meaning they won't even be equipped with steering wheel or controls.
As we will see now, self driving vehicles have implications on the infrastructure, the data, and the service layer.
In order to reach these levels of automation, the transportation infrastructure needs to be updated.
First, vehicles need to be equipped with data processing and communication technologies so they can communicate with each other.
This is also known as the vehicle to vehicle communication.
The infrastructure itself needs to be able to be able to communicate with the vehicle as well.
For example, speed limitations, road signs, traffic lights, need to be equipped in order to be able to send signals to vehicles about the road conditions.
Should we one day have automated bus rapid transit systems, bus stations will need to be equipped with data receiving and emitting devices to be able to communicate with the driver-less buses fleet.
Implications in the data layer are also very important.
The data need to be standardized between the different vehicles.
For example between the bus and cars, and between vehicles from different manufacturers
So they are still able to communicate with one another.
Then comes the question of who owns the data?
Is it the consumer?
Is it the vehicle manufacturer?
Is it the public authority?
Who are those owning the data?
We must ask the question of the pricing of the data.
And to what extent the data can be sold to 3rd party companies?
Last but not least, the data need to be secured.
As you can imagine, misuse of self driving vehicle data could be highly dangerous.
At the services layer, implications also exist.
Indeed, in case of a road accident, the question of who is held accountable must be taken into account.
Is it the car user that is responsible?
Or the transportation provider?
The vehicle manufacturing company?
The insurance company?
And we also need to care about the social acceptance of driver-less vehicle technologies.
That will not be the same among different social classes or age groups.
You might think about the social acceptance of driver-less cars, but the social acceptance of automated public transport should be considered with the same importance.
Last but not least, driver-less vehicles will have institutional implications.
For example, public authorities might need to make the driving code evolve.
Or one can wonder if people will even need to own a kind of driving license... anymore to be able to use a driver-less vehicle?
In this session, we have seen two main directions enabled by the ICTs to address the safety and user experience challenge in private and public transport.
And the implications these 2 directions have in the infrastructure, the data, and the services layer.
We will now hear from our expert Steffen Schaefer from Siemens, who will explain to us what the main drivers behind the emergence of smart urban mobility systems are.
Stay tuned.
