Hello, and welcome back to the course. 
In this session, we will see how the information and communication technologies are enabling the development of new mobility modes that are disrupting the traditional urban transportation landscape.
And more generally, we will see how the ICTs are enabling the paradigm shift from traditional urban transportation to smart urban mobility. 
We will do this along the three following steps.
In the first time, we will discuss the different mobility services that are emerging thanks to digitalization. 
Then we will talk about the potential of the ICTs to go towards more integration in urban transportation systems.
Finally, we will see what this implies for  our infrastructure, data, and services layer. 
Thanks to the development of the ICTs, and especially to geo- localization technologies, new mobility services, partly relying on mechanisms borrowed from the sharing economy have emerged in the last 10 years.
For example, the information and communication technologies have supported the development of car sharing schemes.
Indeed, you can now for example, use your cellphone to know where a car sharing station is located, book a car,  pay for it online, use it, and drop it at the next car sharing station. car2go, DriveNow, for example, are among the most well known car sharing company. 
Should you be using your own vehicle for a defined trip, you can now decide to enter your trip origin and destination, so people that are planning to do a similar trip than the one you're doing, can decide to join your ride. 
This is called car pooling, and one of the most famous platform to do it, is provided by the French company BlaBlaCar.
Still thanks to geo-localization, you can now use your smartphone to hail a ride anytime, anywhere. 
This is call E-hailing that allows you to have access to mobility solutions in many different countries. 
Uber or Lift are, for example, providing such services.
One must also acknowledge the fact that some of these new hybrid mobility modes, as we call them, might also become driverless at one point.
As we have already seen with Uber rolling out driverless Uber services in Pittsburgh, United States.
We are at the edge of a real paradigm shift in urban transportation system that is facilitated by information and communication technology.
These new ICT facilitated services are impacting public and private transport. 
They affect the need for urban dwellers to own their own car, as they make mobility solutions more accessible. 
And they also impact public transportation providers that have, for example, in some case started to provide on-demand shuttles for the customers, such as the Kutsuplus services that was provided in Helsinki last year. 
There is a real paradigm shift happening from transportation to mobility, and from car ownership to mobility usership.
However, many of these new mobility modes are redundant. 
And are complexifying the mobility offers in urban systems, calling for more integration within mobility modes, and across mobility mode. 
All mobility modes are now producing data. 
So, it has now become possible to integrate these data under different schemes. 
The first scheme is known as 
Integrated Ticketing Systems that you might also know as smart card.
There, the users use only one single ticketing system to access and pay for different mobility solutions.
For example, in Seoul, South Korea, the T-money card is accepted on all buses, metros, and suburban trains of the transportation network.
But, it can also be accepted to pay in all taxis operating in Seoul.
Thus integrating public and semi-private transport solutions. 
Integrated Mobility Platforms correspond to more advanced form of transport integration facilitated by information and communication technologies.
With Integrated Mobility Platforms, users have access within one smartphone app to information from various transportation providers about the trip they are planning to do. 
Thus, they are able to know from different transportation providers proposing the trip they want to do, how long the trip will take, how expensive it will be, and much carbon they will make. 
They are not just able to have the information, but also are able to book and pay for the chosen trip on the app, independently of the mobility provider chosen.
And to receive their tickets on their smartphones electronically, as well as their invoice. 
Such solutions tend to integrate public transport solutions with more hybrid solutions such as E-hailing or car pooling, or even human powered solution, such as bike sharing. 
The ultimate integrated mobility solution is known as the Mobility-as-a-Service, which is a mobility distribution model in which a customer's major transportation needs are made over one single interface. 
And these interface mobility services are bundled into monthly packages, similar to mobile phone priced on package that you probably have. 
An easy way to understand
Mobility-as-a-Service is to think about it as the Netflix or the Spotify of transportation. 
It's a platform.
You pay a monthly fee and have access to solutions and mobility services, depending on the package you have selected and paid for.
Even if not proved yet, it's more and more agreed going towards integration should improve the user experience. 
As it will make public transport and hybrid transportation solutions more attractive and more serious alternative to private car users. 
By promoting more shared mobility solutions, integrated mobility solutions
have the potential to reduce congestion, and make our transportation systems more efficient, and ultimately more sustainable.
Integrated mobility solutions contribute to the shift from legacy transportation system to smart urban mobility systems.
However, reaching such levels of integration will have implications in our infrastructure,
 data, and services layer. 
In the infrastructure layer, financing is the big deal. 
New business model have to be developed to warranty the quality of transportation services which translates in investments in the infrastructure layer. 
Nowadays, many different mobility services are using transportation infra, but these transportation infrastructures are still being financed in most of the cases by public authority. 
So new mechanisms on how to finance transportation infrastructure must be developed to cope with the digitalization of urban transportation systems.
In the data layer, one must also make sure that all the data are integrable.
Among different
transportation providers, one must be sure  that the data is inter operable and exchangeable. 
Data from different mobility providers should reach the same level of quality and reliability and of course, be protected to warranty the security of the customers. 
At the service layer, coordination between mobility services providers must be achieved to avoid redundancy. 
To ensure complementarity of the different transportation modes, public authority must put regulations in place as newcomers that are coming from digitalization and traditional transportation providers, are now sharing the exact same playground.
Last but not least, new business models have to be developed between platform operators and mobility service providers to go towards the subscription formula, as it is more and more proposed in the Mobility-as-a-Service model. 
In this session we have seen how the ICTs are enabling the development of new mobility modes that are disrupting the traditional mobility landscape. 
And how the ICTs can enable the paradigm shift from legacy urban transportation system to smart urban mobility system. 
In the next session, you will hear from Natalie Leboucher,
Vice President at RATP Group, who will explain how legacy transport operators are adapting to the digitalization of urban transportation systems.
Stay tuned. 
