Welcome back to the course.
I have the pleasure of receiving
Nathalie Leboucher,
Executive Vice President Innovation Strategy and Business Development from the RATP Group in France, a public transport operator.
Before, she was a head of Smart City at Orange, the French telecom operator.
Thank you, Nathalie, for being here.
Hello. This is a real pleasure to be here at EPFL.
Thank you. So the 1st question
I would like to ask you is what are the main trends you see in urban mobility?
Today, we can see that 3 major trends are reshaping urban mobility and accelerating the emergence of smart mobility solutions.
First, there is increasing pressure on urban mobility systems.
By 2030, more than 60% of the world's population will live in urban areas.
This will lead to a massive increase in daily individual journeys, representing a new challenge for urban mobility systems.
Other factors put urban mobility systems under pressure, such as financial sustainability, environmental challenges, and infrastructure capacity.
Second, we observe major shifts in city dwellers' habits and needs.
Here are a few examples:
Consumers want on demand, customized solutions to their daily needs.
They look for the best value for the money.
More and more customers prefer a pay as you use system.
They expect to have access to additional services.
And last, but not least, they want to be able to choose within their large range of transport solutions and get recommendations at each step of their user experience.
And, finally, we are in the middle of a major digital revolution.
There are some recent digital technologies that offer a huge field of possibilities for the future of urban mobility: big data, machine learning, the Internet of Things, the user experience and user interface design, open data and blockchain technologies, just to name a few.
Good. Now 2nd question.
What are the main models emerging in urban public transport?
Well, Matthias, we foresee 6 main categories of emerging business models in public transport.
Thanks to the internet revolution, intermediation platforms allow direct transactions between service providers and users.
The revenue model is a commission on each transaction, and we all know Uber, BlaBlaCar, and Booking.com.
Pay as you use models are defining a new a paradigm.
There is a shift from owning a product or an asset to using a service.
For the transport sector, we are seeing newcomers in car-sharing, bike, and scooter services.
Consumers pay for monthly fees and according to usage.
Device Centric models are based on consumers devoted to a top-of-the-line innovative brand, such as Apple or Tesla.
The primary revenue source is the device itself.
Additional revenues comes from paying for services within the core system.
Low Cost models focus on the key expectations of clients for the best price.
In this case, revenues come from core service prices and extra charges for additional services.
Data Centric models, now, are based on process data.
They generally provide customers with free high-quality services and, in exchange, gather all data produced by their use.
If it's free, then you know that you are the product.
Most developed centric models, for example Google, which is probably the best example with free services along the whole mobility value chain, with maps, live transit, Waze, Google Wallet,
Google Flight, and so on.
The latest, and most revolutionary business model to emerge is decentralized services on platforms using blockchain technologies.
Decentralized services are emerging models with no proven pattern of success at this stage, but if they do succeed, they could be a major revolution in the transport sector.
Imagine this as Uberization of Uber, with companies such as Arcade City or LaZooz.
These emerging business models are disrupting the urban mobility ecosystem as we know it.
They challenge the whole public transport value chain.
They are inventing smarter ways to meet urban mobility infrastructure challenges.
Provide city dwellers with customized, on demand mobility solutions.
And develop green mobility solutions.
New players enter the transport value chain through customer-related activities, information, and sales.
They invest, massively, in customer acquisition, where traditional players, such as RATP Group, invest heavily in infrastructure.
And now to the 3rd question:
So what main strategies do you see of legacy operators to adapt to this new environment?
The emergence of innovative, smart mobility solutions represents both a huge opportunity and a huge challenge for legacy transport actors.
Legacy transport operators, such as RATP Group, are facing stiff competition from 4 different directions: market deregulation on core networks, urban mobility solutions now being offered by car makers, smart mobility and disruptive solutions now being offered by digital actors, both major internet players and start-ups.
To adapt to this new environment, legacy transport actors have to strive for excellence in their core business.
Improve and deepen knowledge of their customers to enhance user experience.
And develop a full mobility ecosystem based on 2 elements: expand the range of mobility solutions and offer additional services.
Three levels are vital to success.
The 1st is to implement a digital transformation plan.
At RATP, our plan is based on 4 pillars: customer experience, employee experience, operational performance, thanks to big data and IoT, and environmental performance.
The 2nd level is to accelerate innovation.
In the past, legacy transport operators have mainly focused on incremental and technical innovation.
Their aim was to improve their existing network and operational performance.
Today, they need to add market innovation and disruptive innovation to the equation.
Let me give you a few examples of what I mean.
We need to develop innovation capacity through specialized experts and labs and launch major innovation programs, such as 3-D printing, robots, energy storage, drones,
Silver Economy, and so forth.
We need to increase agility and speed of execution.
Focus on business driven innovation, and promote a culture of innovation throughout the company.
New business models and partnerships are the 3rd, and final, level to success.
Legacy operators must enhance visibility in the urban mobility ecosystem by participating in major tech entrance port events.
They need to build partnerships with both large groups and startups.
They need to develop M&A investment capacity for early stage, or development stage, companies.
From all that you said, what would be the main message to our participants?
Well, from what I've just shown you, it is clear that we live in a radically changing urban mobility context.
Thanks to the digitalization, we have exciting opportunities to better serve our clients.
Thank you very much, Nathalie.
Thank you.
