Welcome back.
In this last session of the third block we will now talk about the necessary conditions towards smart urban mobility systems.
Highlighting in particular that main challenges for managers and policy-makers.
So let's first look at the challenges for managers.
I mean typically those are challenges for urban transportation managers.
And we have distinguished this along as a series of categories but the most important one a sort of the challenges in the area of the infrastructure layer, the services layer and the data layer.
Now, the most important challenges at the infrastructure layer level are the questions of interconnection of transportation modes.
The different transportation modes in light of mobility as being the new kind of approach, the new kind of services.
Managers need to pay much more attention into the interconnection of the different transportation modes.
And also they need to pay attention to upgrading the infrastructures with the necessary ICT devices, sensors, tools, so that they can be made digital compatible.
So that the services can actually be offered.
On the services layers,
I think managers are particularly challenged to come up with new business models.
On the basis of this data that are generated it is important to find the business models that are sustainable
 and that will work.
And also on the services layer it is of course important that the users accept a new services and that has very much to do with the digital divide.
Not all types of user are equally adapt to dealing with a new digital mobility services.
On the data layer the typical challenge pertains for managers, for urban transportation managers pertains to data standards, and protocols.
So that the data that are generated can actually be exchange and used later to meet make the services.
Another big challenge of course at the data layer is the security challenge, to make sure that this data are not hacked and that there are no security breaches.
Now, let's look at the challenges for policy-makers, for urban policy-makers
Again, the same distinctions but the focus is of course different and the infrastructure layer.
I think policy-makers are very much challenged to find the necessary finances for this infrastructures.
This is not necessarily a question that is new but of course in the context of the new mobility services it's very important to look at what needs to be finance and which infrastructures need to be finance.
Then other policy-makers challenges here are the infrastructure development which infrastructures to develop, what kind of infrastructures to develop and that always in relationship to land use planning, where to develop.
And if one looks at the metropolitan level it's the same kind of thing except that there are multiple political authorities that need to plan and develop the infrastructures together and plan the land use together.
On the services layer, the challenge here for policy-makers is the coordination of the different actors involved.
If we go to mobility services
There're many more actors to coordinate and that is often
a political challenged and then it's also of course the question of the regulation because the different actors operate under different kind of roles.
And there is no level playing field and therefore there is a big challenge for policy-makers to come up with regulations that actually allow for mobility services.
The same actually is true at the metropolitan level except that most typically regulation will not happen there but it's also a challenge
 of coordinating the different actors.
And on the data layer the challenge, the main challenge for policy-makers pertains first to the whole financing of the data infrastructure.
There are all kind of investments that are necessary to make this data platforms, to make them available, make them usable and put them at the disposal of the different operators.
Another political challenge is the privacy challenge.
How much privacy is necessary?
And how much privacy do actually the citizens want?
Then a further challenge pertains to political challenge, pertains to data policy, is data an infrastructure,
is a data just a service, is data a product and how to regulate these different data?
How to regulate access to this data?
How to regulate ownership to this data?
The same questions arise of course also at the metropolitan level.
To conclude,
in this block we have conceptualized smart urban transportation systems.
And we have showed how the ICTs, how digitalization can improve and can enable the shift towards such systems.
We highlighted in particular at the end the challenges for managers, urban transportation managers and policy-makers.
Now, in the next two blocks we will have take a much more in-depth look into the transition towards smart cities.
Stay tuned.
