Land registry
African cities: Intro to urban planning
Land registry is different than addressing, why?
Because it allows to see all the properties.
On the address, the whole property is indicated, in square meters and with the owner's name.
In legal terms, the cadastre allows greater security.
In contrast, it allows to know the entire land, and it enables the taxation of a certain number of owners.
Land registry is not a new concept, it's been used for a long time.
Since land property exists, it has always been made in a plan.
When we talk about Land Registry, we mean land ownership.
And possession of lands.
Land Registry is a sort of ID for land ownership.
There is a plot, its owner and some features.
There are three land registry missions: technical, property and tax.
The cadastre is a two dimensional representation, a mapping of the city.
There is a number of plots with a database attached to the representation.
So we have both alphanumerical data and geographical data.
The tax cadastre allows the listing of all personal and real properties, and consequently the taxation.
The land registry is not created only to know who the people are and where they live, but also for taxation and levy purposes.
The legal land registry is a security of land ownership.
The plot of these many square meters located at such place is registered somewhere as Mr John Doe's property.
Then, the technical land registry, allows a sort of city plan to help making decisions for all networks and infrastructures.
It becomes a tool for daily urban management.
We realize that when making urban plans, specific background maps are necessary.
The technical cadastre can play this role.
But for the land registry to be used as such, just like tax or legal land registry, it must be updated on a regular basis.
Each move, each change and each new owner must be registered in the cadastre.
Each new plot must be identified and put in the database.
It's major work with high resource costs.
Most cities do not have the resources to update the land registry.
They often have the resources to create it and its layers, but it remains untouched for years.
Yet the land registry is only interesting if regularly updated.
Consequently, even if it demands a lot of resources, once in place and updated it enables better returns for the local economy.
So a part of the collected taxes should be reinvested to update the cadastre.
It's a whole system that needs rethinking.
In some countries, there is the land registry, in others, the law on taxation, on land ownership, but no one pays it because no one asks for it.
There is still a long way to go.
This is to say that land registry or addressing should have their biggest impact on local finances.
The idea is not to have populations paying, no matter what, but that today, in our cities, creating equipment and infrastructures, or providing services, etc., has a cost.
And we must find mechanisms to be able to cover the costs.
For example, having people paying for these costs, the wealthiest people of course, we can't ask people squatting the land to pay a tax, even if it were possible.
Tax is not individual, it serves a collective effort which enables, not to replenish the government budget, but to create a daily management of lands where we are.
This is extremely important, because it is not in the spirit of the age today, but we have to realize that the lack of infrastructures and facilities in the African cities comes also from the fact that people do not see why they should pay taxes and levies.
Yet it's exactly to make up for this deficit that taxes must be paid.
