We've just said that, in the second age of globalization, it still seemed relevant to build local capacities for the development of new transformative activities.
Let's now spend five minutes on this notion of "local".
We talked of scale, critical mass, innovation system, agglomeration.
We have not yet said that these structures also have to be physically located on a certain territory.
There are a lot of agglomeration phenomena on the net.
And it is even fairly easy to build. But this is not enough.
A critical mass can be virtual and many relationships between agents can be remotely established indeed.
Why is it then recommended to have localized capabilities on a territory and linked by some physical proximity?
The general idea is that the co-location of firms, research partners, skilled workers and other resources, constitute an important engine for innovation.
So there is an economic gain to encourage the formation of local innovation capacities.
We can, following the economist Marianne Feldmann, give a critical explanation.
Spatial proximity enhances the flow of knowledge, information, new ideas and facilitates cognitive interactions.
The key explanation is that the knowledge needed for innovation, as well as for relationships between partners, have an important tacit dimension.
We cannot write everything and codify everything, so that everything could be done remotely.
We must meet and talk to understand each other and for knowledge to combine and integrate.
Physical proximity allows all of this much better than the virtual worlds. It facilitates communication, increases unforeseen and surprising encounters probabilities that can lead to new ideas and also the opportunity to build social relationships, themselves conducive to the circulation of ideas.
Let's also observe the nature of the connections between a company and additional capacities, research, services, training or users which are needed to innovate.
The company can obviously establish distance relationships but physical proximity offers opportunities for observation, interaction and mutual learning.
From this explanation, it appears that the innovative performances not only result of the individual effort but also the quality of the immediate environment, characterized by a certain density of relationships and physical proximity to certain key institutions.
We also observe that this effect of physical proximity on the quality of interactions between agents is even stronger when companies belong to the same industry or related industries.
Finally, it should be noted that the co-location of capabilities and people has dynamic virtues, which allow the growth and enrichment of the agglomeration of resources.
A territory can evolve, grow, diversify thanks to different types of virtuous circles arising from this physical proximity.
For example, it is more interesting to settle somewhere when the density of connections increases.
This produces a classic phenomenon of self-reinforcing and tipping point.
The more firms there are, the more possibilities of connections, of recombinations and surprising encounters.
In addition, the increasing number of firms on a site strengthens factor markets - skilled workers, specialized services - as well as research infrastructures.
In other words, the fact that businesses are located somewhere will increase the attraction of this "somewhere" and the likelihood that others come too.
The works of Brian Arthur that analyze the effects of positive feedback on location were pioneers in this field by highlighting the strength and the persisting influence of small events or historical accidents that arise very early in history and influence the final result in terms of agglomeration and relational density.
But if a simple increase of the number of firms has virtuous properties of self-reinforcing, other factors are also important to magnify the effects of physical proximity.
Some economists - Agrawal and Cockburn in particular - identify empirically dynamic elements creating virtuous circles within the local innovation system.
These are important results that we should know before designing a smart specialization strategy and initiate policies to promote the growth of a new business in a certain area of ​​specialization.
We can first mention the virtuous role of large enterprises who do R & D in a particular area of ​​specialization and create many positive externalities in favour of the other actors operating in the same field.
They strengthen for example the research of local Universities, facilitate the growth of factor markets and improvemarkets for technologies, thanks to the relationships they have with small businesses.
This is the theory of Anchor Tenant.
A powerful research university in certain areas is also a key factor in the agglomeration dynamic and spatial concentration.
It enables the advancement of knowledge in these fields, the training of the people who will then be innovators in the private sector, the undertaking of problem-solving activities in collaboration with the industry and finally, the creation of new firms.
Firms of different sizes are also an important asset for the dynamic agglomeration.
Large firms, we have just said it, produce externalities that benefit the immediate environment.
They also create spin-offs which, as a rule, are installed nearby.
Symmetrically, small firms produce external effects, by attracting specialized services that they cannot internalize.
Both externalities, spin-offs of large firms and third party services attracted by small ones, complement each other and create a virtuous spiral of agglomeration and strengthening of the relational density.
The agglomeration of diverse institutions can create forms of learning,
Based on synergy and hybridization thanks to institutional mobility of people,
Which is made easy by physical proximity.
Finally, a site, a territory has memory.
The mobility of economic agents, the fact that they leave a territory does not necessarily mean a net loss of knowledge.
Those who are going keep their social relationships with those who remain and therefore continue to collaborate.
They leave but are not forgotten.
We thus reach the idea of rich and dynamic innovation local system.
A system characterized by significant agglomeration effects, capable to provide all the additional resources and likely to grow by attracting new resources thanks to the increase of the value to be localized there.
A system we can leave but that has memory.
The ultimate project of a smart specialization strategy is to generate this dynamic, in a small number of strategic areas.
The idea of smart specialization, which highlights the importance of building local capacities, recognizes this economic value of physical proximity and territorial roots.
But beware!
This does not mean that the process must be closed and that the ambition of the strategy is autarky. In fact, it is just the opposite for it is by having strong local capabilities that we will be able to take advantage of external resources which are still essential. In other words, the problem is not so much for a peripheral region to choose between a strategy of building local critical mass and local interactions and a connection strategy to the outside because the two go together.
We must constitute strong local capabilities through smart specialization strategy to be able to benefit more from global interactions.
It is therefore clear that the smart specialization strategy, the goal of building local capacities in some areas, should not be an excuse to ignore or snub the global value chains, the international investments realized on its territory and the external resources to the region.
The way a strategy must be lean on these elements of globalization is part of the operationalization of the concept.
Again, the aim is not autarky or isolation towards the outside nor towards international assets placed in its territory.
On the contrary. only a rich and strong local system will benefit from these external elements.
Thank you!
