In this module, we talk about entrepreneurial discovery and show that it is an essential principle that will help us change paradigm in terms of innovation policy.
This is what allows a region and its government to identify and initiate large strategic actions without falling into a mode of central planning.
We'll talk about the theoretical basis of this concept, on one side Hayek and Sabel on the fact that the State cannot know everything and that the discovery process is an essential aspect; on the other hand, Hirshleifer and Kirzner, for who discovery has a fundamental informational dimension, unlike innovation; and also Haussmann and Rodrik who helped popularize the theme in their work in development economics.
A smart specialization strategy seeks to identify strategic areas in which capacities are built for the development of new transformative activities.
So there is a problem of information and knowledge.
How to identify these areas and learn about the probability of success within each of them?
There are two solutions: the omniscient State, the big planner who believes he has the ability to accumulate enough information and "ex ante" knowledge to determine strategic priorities, to develop a plan and then create incentives for companies to execute the plan.
This is what Sabel calls "the principal-agent governance."
The alternative works on the assumption that the state does not know, or not enough.
The knowledge about future activities which are susceptible of transforming a sector, of modernizing, diversifying it, is not obvious, not trivial.
It is only very partially in books or in consulting firms.
It is dispersed and divided, it can be hidden, it often results from the combination and integration of dispersed and fragmented knowledge.
And above all, it cannot be fully produced and known "ex ante".
A large fraction of this knowledge is unknown and will gradually be discovered according to the actual process of exploration of selected areas.
It was Charles Sabel who wrote it.
"What happens when we assume that there are no principals, no omniscient State, with robust and panoramic knowledge needed for a directive role?"
Any systematic information produced "ex ante" is obviously useful, we will see it in the
3rd week, but will still be insufficient.
There is a discovery process to carry out and who can do it if not the innovation actors themselves the entrepreneurs, the researchers, the leading users perhaps even citizens?
The main difference between the two solutions opposes an information research mechanism based on the assumption that we can know everything before, and that our decisions will therefore be fully informed; and a discovery mechanism, according to which we do not know a lot before, at least not enough and that a fundamental element of surprise accompanies the discovery mechanism.
We could retake and detail many methods which aimed to identify strategic industries, key sectors, technological complexity levels that industries should get over.
All these methods, particularly popular in the 60-80-90's, are more sophisticated than each other and are alike in that they leave no room to entrepreneurial discovery and to that element of surprise.
These methods basically rest on a form of illusion.
The illusion that it is possible to know everything in order to plan everything in a centralized and scientifical way.
The production of "ex ante" information is obviously useful but we must make the difference between an approach aimed at a supposedly complete "ex ante" information to achieve a central plan, which does not seem relevant to us, and an "ex ante" information of a stylised facts type, like those written here, or knowledge of the existing structures and resources, what we will see in the third week, of which we recognize the incompleteness and which we will use as a guide for entrepreneurial discovery.
This fundamental principle of incompleteness of "ex ante" information to decide priorities, logically and inevitably, leads into the principle of entrepreneurial discovery or "self-discovery".
We can ask ourselves: what are we trying to discover?
The information that has to be discovered in order to create a smart specialization strategy, is structured by the objective of the considered policy.
In our case, it is a compound element which answers two questions.
Is this area strategic?
The answer is given by the probability Pa.
Can this strategic area be successfully exploited?
The answer is given by the Pap probability.
The Pap discovery is on the early phases of development of the new activity, on the ability of actors to coordinate and to form a critical mass for the development of this activity.
We must understand that the answer to the second question, on ?ap involves concrete investments in exploratory projects, platforms, networks.
This is to explore the strategic area and learn about the possibilities of development in this area, the formation of a critical mass and the potentials for structural transformations.
And it is probably at this level that the discovery of new knowledge, along the process, and the surprise element that accompanies it will be the most marked.
The social value of the entrepreneurial discovery process is this informational value that allows the
State to answer the two questions listed and therefore to make decisions at both levels.
What strategic area?
What chances of success in each area?
The entrepreneurial discovery process also informs companies on opportunities in such and such field.
Entrepreneurial discovery is basically the mechanism which enables to solve the information problems in away that avoids falling into a central planning mode or a "principal-agent" mode of governance.
The companies, rather large, can internalize the entrepreneurial discovery process.
They seek new strategic areas, then explore them concretely.
Let's give two examples, taken at random.
Toshiba identifies a new strategic area and develops exploratory research projects.
This is the conversion of some of these establishments to develop "clean factory farms" in order to produce vegetables and fruits in perfectly free of germs environments.
Schindler, a leading company in the field of elevators and other escalators explores a new strategic area, that of the "transit management".
This is not about further improving the lift but to develop the concept of integrated and intelligent mobility that combines access, support, communication, transport and security.
Although it is more difficult, a group of
SMEs, can also internalize a process of entrepreneurial discovery, especially if the collective action which is engaged is coordinated and supported by an industrial association or a technology centre.
The difference between an entrepreneurial discovery process internalized by a firm and an entrepreneurial discovery process as a basis for a public policy is that in the first case, the social value of the process will be lower.
Typically, the company will disclose information on Pa, probably not on Pap.
Toshiba, Schindler announce in the press their new strategic area but these announcements are logically rather superficial in terms of information on the content of projects.
When the entrepreneurial discovery process is supported by an innovation policy, it is critical that the informational value is the strongest possible.
And so, subsidized companies under this policy must agree to comply to these information disclosure rules.
What are the obstacles and barriers that can hinder a policy aiming to stimulate the entrepreneurial discovery process?
Specifically, the potentially high informational value of the process poses complicated problems that are well known.
The social return, because of a so high informational value, is higher than the private return.
Because of such information externalities, companies will tend to invest too little in this process since it is supposed to inform others.
This externality must therefore be corrected without reducing the informational value of the process since that is its "raison d'être".
Only a subsidy mechanism, unlike a patent, can solve this problem.
On the other hand, the production of information on PAP involves solving coordination problems when the area to explore requires assembling varied skills and knowledge that are not all available in the region and that may be held by very different organizations.
Here, as we have already seen in the first week, having identified rather narrow strategic areas and stimulated a coordinated project portfolio can help solve these problems of coordination.
Regions must take this principle of entrepreneurial discovery as an opportunity, not as a constraint.
John Enos, a distinguished Oxford economist, did not say something else when he wrote already in the 80s : "countries and regions should put more efforts into choosing, in detail and for the future, the direction of research and development
- on what products, what processes, into what markets".
He added that an essential reason for this is that, by doing so, we gain knowledge and accumulate experience which will be of great value for the following stages of innovation.
But what Enos said is only true if there is indeed discovery, learning, surprise.
It would be less true in the case of omniscient planner which precisely seeks to avoid any surprises.
That is what is meant.
In our view, the principle of entrepreneurial discovery is fundamental.
It enables to change of policy paradigm and not fall into a centralized planning mode based on the belief of a possibility of complete "ex ante" information to decide.
During the third week, we will look at the operational content of this process.
