For a long time, there is a debate to know whether the regions have an interest to specialize or rather to diversify.
There are positive arguments on both sides and the empirical literature could never produce a final findings on this issue.
The reason is probably that both logics are important and must be reconciled.
This reconciliation is at the heart of the concept of smart specialization strategy.
We can see in fact that a smart specialization strategy does not really push to specialization in the classical sense.
When we see this pattern we realize that the objective is the generation of new options and new opportunities to diversify and transform structures.
However we also know that for these options to be viable and effective we must concentrate resources, form capacities.
In short, one must "specialize" in new activities that have been selected.
Thus, the smart specialization strategy reconciles diversification and specialization.
We specialize in activities that diversify structures.
This is a first proposition, the diversification is favorable to innovation and to structural change when it is accompanied by the formation of new critical masses and is therefore not synonymous with scattering and dispersion of projects and capacities.
A close proposition is that variety is especially favorable for innovation and development when that variety is technologically connected to existing structures.
Looking back at all the cases of spontaneous dynamic of entrepreneurial discovery and structural changes that we had seen during the first week, most have basically the same structure which is the development of a new activity connected to an industry or two existing industries.
Thus the Lyon technical fabrics come from the silk manufacturers and chemists.
The plastic molds of Marinia Grande, come from glass molding factories.
The development of nanotechnologies is associated with the paper & pulp industry in Finland.
And even the eyewear cluster of Morez comes from a nail factory.
Diversification refers here to economies of scope, that is to say the possibility of redeploying production tools to target a new market.
Whilst transition and modernization rather refer to spillovers, that is to say to the integration of new technologies in a traditional sector which allows to develop a new activity.
All these cases illustrate that the entrepreneurial discovery and the process of structural change often follow a logic of related varieties.
This concept was formulated by Koen Frenken and his co-authors to attempt to gather the arguments in favor of specialization and the arguments in favor of diversity.
The process of structural change, the most logical, the most common is that of related diversification and regions diversify by plugging in to new industries which are connected to local industries.
We go in the Lyon region, from the silk and chemistry sectors to polymers and technical fabrics, pharmacy, equipment for extreme sports etc.
Of course, there are very important external inputs but this branching process from local industries is central.
This logic is more likely to happen than that of an unrelated diversification.
The smart specialization strategy is essentially governed by this principle of related varieties this exploration of possibles adjacents as Ricardo Hausmann says.
It's time to finish now by situating our interpretation of the concept of "specialization" compared to more standard interpretations.
Specialization?
What does that mean in the term "smart specialization"?
Most of the time specialization refers to a relative measure: if the share of this industry in the regional economy is stronger than the share of the same industry in the national economy, then the region is qualified a "specialized" in this industry.
In some areas of economic life relative measures can constitute a good point of comparison.
For example in the health sector or education.
But in the field of R & D and innovation, what matters the most are absolute values.
That's critical mass, agglomeration of resources and the assembling of capacities that make the difference.
Relative performances are not necessarily the panacea because as already said there are indivisibilities, agglomeration and critical mass effects.
Take the example of Upper Austria, the region of Linz.
A region of strong industrial tradition in the fields of mechanics and machines and that happens to be in a strong relationship with much larger neighbours as Bavaria or Baden-Würtemberg.
One of my students, Monica Coffano, calculated the relative ​​and absolute values of the specialization of Upper Austria in electro-mechanics and optical fields on the base of patent data.
From a "relative specialisation" point of view we see that Upper Austria is highly specialized in electro-mechanics and optical.
These are all the small yellow bars which extend to the right and show that this region is specialized in these areas relatively to other Austrian regions.
And besides, the fact that the yellow bars are larger than the other coloured bars shows that this relative specialization is often higher than the other regions taken as a comparison like Baden-Würtemberg
Bavaria, Flanders, Piedmont.
So a large specialization in some electro-technical fields which would place it at first European rank ahead of Bavaria or Baden-Würtemberg.
But when we go to absolute measures still on patent data, this region, without wanting to offend it, becomes a dwarf against giants such as Bavaria.
And from R&D efficiency, and innovation point of view, from creativity point of view it is this second measure that counts because it captures critical mass and agglomeration effects.
Thus, the fact that a region has a smart specialization strategy should not be understood as an indication that this region is specialized in the considered field, in a passive sense relative to other regions.
But we must understand that it involves building capacities, skills and other factors to develop a transformative activity.
This does not mean that there will be no effect of this strategy on relative specializations.
There will probably be some without doubt, logically, but only in the long term and this is not the most important.
This module has proposed an overview of the relationships between diversification and specialization and has positioned the concept of smart specialization strategy within this framework.
We made 3 propositions.
First, the diversification is favorable to innovation and structural change, when accompanied by the formation of new critical masses and is not synonymous with scattering and dispersion of projects and capacities.
Secondly, the variety is especially favorable to innovation and development, when that variety is connected to existing structures.
Finally, the measures of specialization in relative terms will not allow to capture a smart specialization dynamics.
We will offer other methods of measurement during the next week.
