In this module it is about highlighting what distinguishes a smart specialization strategy as an innovation policy compared to more traditional policies, the so-called horizontal or sector-neutral policies.
What distinguishes a smart specialization policy is its complexity and the fact that it can't offer a single, standard solution because it must take into account the specificities of the priority areas which are selected.
I like to say it is "haute couture" rather than "ready-to-wear".
So it is expensive and difficult to implement.
This complexity and specificity involve a number of constraints and challenges in terms of policy design which I'll talk about now.
For decades we've been searching for good policies to stimulate structural change that is to say, the transformation of structures of an economy in a positive direction ; diversification, modernization emergence of new industries.
Until recently preferred policies, particularly in Europe were called horizontal policies that is to say policies which focus on general conditions and generic factors of innovation.
For instance: public research infrastructure or the financing of start-ups.
Problems that affect all businesses like R & D costs or intellectual property.
It is also about indirect policies as those about training or immigration
The instruments of such policy are classical
R & D grant, tax credit, refundable loan but also organizations and platforms that address generic problems.
All companies are involved whatever their sector of activity.
These policies thus avoid preferential interventions, the targeting of such and such technology area.
This is why they are called sector-neutral policies
There certainly were exceptions : cluster policies in favor of the new Länder just after the reunification of Germany or competitiveness poles in France.
But horizontal policies dominate the landscape in Europe and beyond for decades.
This is a commendable policy, it helps improve key elements of the innovation system and minimizes the risks of distortion inherants to any policy which selects projects by sectors or technologies.
And such a policy can lead to structural change through well known mechanisms, spotted for example by my colleagues
Ron Boschma and Koen Frenken.
The ability of companies to diversify, the dynamics leading to the creation of new companies, networking and mobility of people, particularly from the outside of a region.
These horizontal policies have worked rather well particularly in the case of the most advanced regional or national economies.
In these ones the positive structural change can be stimulated through the only virtues of horizontal policies and companies respond positively to the incentives produced by the proper functioning of the framework conditions.
However, these policies have not allowed the least developed regions and countries to progress much.
Why did this not work too well in a number of regions whereas important resources were allocated in the framework of the cohesion policies dedicated to R & D and innovation?
That is the question that must be asked.
Innovation in most cases not only requires that the general conditions of the economy work well.
To get the basic right </ i>.
Innovation not only requires that public research infrastructures be funded and developed.
But it also requires specific capacities and resources: research, services, skills platforms, suppliers.
It therefore demands a critical size so that these different resources can be mobilized.
It demands scale and agglomeration effects, relational density.
Innovation is therefore based on rich and sufficient in size local innovation systems.
And these systems are specific to each sector or each technology.
In the more developed regions, these specific capabilities are provided thanks to the wealth of ecosystem of innovation.
Large companies, top universities, other public or private actors provide these capacities in the form of spillovers of their own research activities, training, technological diffusion.
These spillovers represent these complementary capacities of which SMEs can benefit even if they have not contributed to their production.
In other regions as Suzan Berger explains in her beautiful book "Making in America", the sources of these capabilities have dried or have never existed.
Gaping holes exist in ecosystems
"SMEs are home alone," she says speaking of many regions of her country.
They are isolated and without these complementary capacities so important for innovation.
Even startups with generous fundings and an excellent innovative idea cannot do everything at home and require these additional capacities.
Suppliers, skilled workers engineers, expertise: the ecosystem is too poor to provide all that.
Some local ecosystems have degraded because those providing complementary capacities no longer do.
A consequence of offshoring and of the new governance logics of large companies.
Other ecosystems have not degraded but have remained very poor.
This poverty of the ecosystems is a problem for the less developed regions that can't solve a policy limited to horizontal measures.
But it is also a problem in the case of advanced regions where very often there is only a small number of ecosystems capable of functioning properly.
In the greater part of an economy of an advanced region, firms are also "home alone".
This analysis suggests that in many areas policies must break the dogma of neutrality and horizontality because structural changes will not emerge spontaneously from a "simple" improvement of framework conditions.
The government must do more that is to say support the formation of local innovation systems which are specific for each field or each sector and which is not only reduced to public research but include all additional capacities.
But we are left now in another part of the policies space.
We left the sector-neutral policies part to join the part of the policies that attach to provide specific capacities to serve specific activities.
As Haussman and Rodrik say, this move is inevitable. They write:
"It is an illusion to believe </ i> that the Government could disengage </ i> from specific policies </ i> and limit itself to neutral policies; </ i> an illusion which is produced </ i> by the misunderstanding of the specificity
</ i> and the complexity of input factors </ i> and required capacities for innovation "</ i>.
The problem is the difficulty of this policy.
Each sector, each domain is specific and it is therefore about very expensive policies in terms of implementation, coordination provision of specific capabilities.
Support the development of biotech applications applied to fisheries and marine resource management involves providing different capacities from those required for the development of advanced manufacturing technologies in the case of the food industry.
Very different from those that allow the development of energetic efficiency solutions in the automotive field.
We could of course use the same instruments as the horizontal policy while targeting beneficiaries.
Research tax credit only for green technologies and R & D grants only for food companies which adopt information technologies.
However, this type of targeting is practically very difficult and poses almost insoluble problems of definition of industries borders.
Who is in? Who's out?
Who does what ? It's very complicated.
So a non-neutral policy will rather seek to provide specific complementary capabilities that only interest companies that are really engaged in a certain area.
Such policy oriented towards the formation of complementary capabilities and the concentration of resources in specific areas must take into account this specificity and this complexity.
And this has a cost
This is the cost of "haute couture" compared to the "ready-to-wear".
R&D tax credit is a "ready-to-wear" instrument.
Of course it is expensive in terms of tax loss but the implementation is relatively easy.
On the other side, providing specific capacities in such and such technological area is much more expensive and difficult:
"haute couture"!
Numerous economists are skeptical about the ability of a government to master such complexity which requires a detailed understanding of needs in such areas and complementarities between different types of investment.
A famous development economist
Matsuyama said for example that one thing is to develop a theory of economic coordination mechanisms, another is to develop useful tools to build a policy aiming to address these problems effectively.
This skepticism is justified.
A minimalist solution is to recognize that the Government cannot do everything and meet all the specific needs and attempt to solve all the coordination problems in all the parts of its economy.
It must make choices.
It is not that choices are desirable, they are simply unavoidable as Haussman and Rodrik say.
And we have already said it, we join the first argument in favor of a certain specialization:
"a region should not be doing a little bit of everything".
This was an argument of scale, of critical mass.
The argument of political feasibility related to the limited capacity of the Government is added.
However, choosing between different areas to conduct preferential actions faces a second wave of skepticism.
Well formulated for example by Anne Krueger. it's a long quote that concludes with "allocating resources preferentially so that some kinds of activities will benefit from excellent infrastructures and others won't; this appears as a distortion. "
These different types of skepticism are certainly justified and we can share the opinion of those economists.
But where most economists decide to give up and return to the space of neutral policies where there is no choice to make between areas, sectors, the approach of smart specialization does not give up the non-neutral policies but open a new perspective.
Certainly there are potential risks but the question is not to know whether we will do this policy but rather how to do it to minimize the risks.
Skepticism must be our motivation to be closely interested in the design of the policy that is to say to the operating modes that will help minimize the issues raised by a non-neutral policy aiming to identify strategic areas to carry on preferential actions.
In the policy space - we are therefore in the part of non-neutral policies - and we can identify different logics on the basis of "how to choose".
Who's deciding ? What level of aggregation?
In the previous module we show that the principle of self discovery is crucial to avoid falling into the trap of the Government who knows everything and thus protects itself from unexpected learning and the potential of surprise that conceals entrepreneurial discovery.
We are not coming back to it only to say that this opposition between two ways of solving the information problem structures the space of non-neutral policies.
There is a long history of policies establishing priorities in a top down way by an omniscient government which asks a bureaucratic committee to decide.
The methods of choice can be very sophisticated.
However, they remain marked by the technocratic illusion that we can know everything ex ante.
The alternative is therefore the principle of self discovery.
This subspace is not only occupied by the smart specialization strategy but other approaches claim such logic.
They also recognize the importance of strategic choices but these must be informed by the entrepreneurial discovery process.
This is the case of development policies by Haussman and Rodrik.
We can thus discern a familiarity of goals and approaches between these approaches which certainly have different objectives but try to reconcile the fact of being forced to choose, to specialize, and the fact of promoting an entrepreneurial dynamic.
As such, the smart specialization strategy finds its place in what is called new industrial policies : non-neutral policies where the design of the policy is central to minimize the risks linked to any policy action aiming for preferential interventions in areas defined as strategic.
