When we have to make strategic choices aimed at the preferential development of new activities and that therefore involve targeted interventions towards certain areas or certain firms, we risk making mistakes.
Some choices may seem irrelevant afterwards whilst decisions not to engage in such area could later appear as erroneous.
And that's one of the advantages of a horizontal policy to avoid these mistakes since the programs and instruments are available for all.
In this second part, we recall the five types of errors commonly made and we identify the design elements that help to minimize these errors or to reduce their costs.
First is the error of the omniscient planner.
We've already talked about it.
This error is based on the belief that we can accumulate in advance, all the knowledge and information that will allow to design a complete plan and then stimulate enterprises to execute it.
But, we have said it, the knowledge that the Government can hold in advance is very limited, even after ordering sophisticated statistics, simply because the most important knowledge will be discovered as the process goes.
The only medicine against this error, is the application of a principle of entrepreneurial discovery.
We do not know ex ante what to do.
We must find out.
This was module 3 of this week and we will come back to it in the weeks devoted to the operationalization of the strategy.
The second error is the choice made at the sectoral level.
(Tourism, textile, food, pharmacy).
Conducting a sectoral prioritization within an innovation policy does not make any sense.
The problem is not to help all the firms simply because they belong to such sector but to help those who are engaged in a project, in the development of a new activity.
The sectoral level is also not adapted, as was already said, to the new phase of globalization called the
"second unbundling".
The level of prioritization must be located at a finer granularity, the activity or specialty.
We do not help the fisheries sector but the biotechnology development activity for the management of marine resources.
We do not help the wood and forest industry but the development of a bio-economy applied to wood and forest.
Thus, the distortions are reduced because public action is located in the area of an ​​innovation policy and not in the area of a sectoral sector.
In addition, this level of activity, is the right level at which a region can discern opportunities for itself, that it could not see at sectoral level.
Finally, it allows to have an inclusive strategy, as we will see later.
At this finer level, priorities can be distributed through a relatively large number of sectors or cross-cutting areas.
Third mistake: the choices made for ever.
On the basis of comparative advantages, as with Ricardo,
Portugal produces wine and Great Britain, the textile.
And everyone sinks in, we could even say mires in its specialization because the comparative advantages and disadvantages at the origin of the initial specializations are self-perpetuating.
This error is serious enough and there are many reasons for this problem.
Some priorities may become irrelevant.
So we must stop them.
Any activity without exception after a certain time is no longer new.
An activity that has become mature no longer needs to be supported preferentially because other funding mechanisms are better suited to an activity that has reached maturity.
Parallel to this process of maturation of some areas new opportunities can appear and thus new priorities must be established.
Finally, some projects in each priority area can fail.
They must be stopped.
The main lesson of this set of observations is that the smart specialization strategy is a living document.
It would be absurd and not "smart" to have priorities established for ever and to declare that the strategy is definitely completed by refusing for example to incorporate new options and opportunities later.
The principle of flexibility is essential but who says flexibility also says monitoring and evaluation.
The implementation of these principles will be addressed during the fourth week.
The fourth error, like the following one actually, is not specific to a non-neutral policy aimed at preferential actions.
It is also made within horizontal policies.
Indeed, it is not enough to provide generous fundings to R & D projects or platforms in each priority area, because what needs to be increased concerns all the factors that enter a process of research and innovation.
But, the supply of human capital (R & D engineers) is fixed, at least in the short term.
It cannot instantly adjust to an increase in demand for human capital that would be consecutive to the aditional funding.
Let's look at this diagram.
With a supply of human capital that takes time to adapt, the increase of the demand in human capital will translate into higher wages without significant increase in R & D volumes.
The demand curve moves upwards thanks to R & D grants.
But the supply of scientists and engineers is fixed.
From then on, subsidies are dissipated in a rise of wages without resulting in an increase in volume of R&D and innovation activities.
Of course, the problem of supply adjustment can be solved in part by immigration and the call for engineers and scientists from other regions.
But when a new priority area has been identified, it is also coherent to anticipate the development of appropriate training in the region itself.
The last error, finally, concerns the fact of financing projects, activities that would have existed anyway, that is to say, even in the absence of public funding.
If public funding is given for a project that would have been executed by the firm anyway, there will be no aditionality effect.
It is a simple transfer of resources from public to private.
It is inefficient for this reason, even if the project is successful.
It is often a difficult thing to understand.
How to fix this error? What project to finance?
The theoretical answer, e.g. Trajtenberg or Wallsten and Stiglitz, tells us that only the projects or activities that are characterized by a negative correlation between private profitability and social profitability should be financed.
This logic is illustrated in this figure by
Stiglitz and Wallsten.
The vertical axis is the social return of the projects; what it brings back to society as a whole.
And the horizontal axis is the private return; what this brings back to those who undertake this project.
The projects in zone C are projects whose private profitability is important. They therefore do not need public funding to be undertaken.
Public funding of C would therefore consist of a simple transfer of resources from the private to the public without allocative effect.
Bad decision!
It is therefore better to fund type B projects.
However, there is a public funding opportunity cost and we cannot fund everything simply because these type B projects have a low private profitability.
Projects in zone A have a low level of private profitability and their anticipated social return is inferior to the cost of public funding.
So, indeed, without public funding, they will not be undertaken but would that penalize society? Probably not.
Finally, public funding will be efficient in the case of projects in zone B since they are low private return projects but which expected social return exceeds the cost of public funding.
In practice, of course, it is difficult to identify projects of zone
B.
But we can nevertheless believe that entrepreneurial discovery projects, that combine and integrate fragmented knowledge to explore a new field and that will ensure a wide and fast distribution of information on these findings, these projects belong to zone B and must be financed by the Government.
These are the five elements of a good design for a non-neutral policy that involves making choices and allocate resources preferentially.
This good design obviously requires a skillful and competent
Government.
We can ask ourselves if, in many areas, this requirement is realistic.
We will discuss during the fourth week by inviting a specialist in this matter our colleague and friend, Kevin Morgan, from the University of Cardiff.
I hope you enjoyed this module on the place of smart specialization strategies in the space of innovation policies.
A place that smart specialization strategy does not occupy alone. Other policies are like it.
In terms of a logic of non-neutral resource allocation, enabling strategic choices through preferential actions.
But this place also implies fundamentally taking care of the design of the policy, to minimize possible errors.
After a week full of theories and concepts of all kinds, let's now see the practice and operationalization of our approach, which will be developed next week.
Thank you!
