Hello, my name is Yves Perriard,
I am a professor at the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology (EPFL) where I give lectures in various subjects, including electrotechnics.
Hello, my name is Paolo Germano, and I teach the electrotechnics course with professor Perriard.
We will both be your teachers for this course, but first, we would like to explain to you what electrotechnic is.
Electrotechnics is the body of basis knowledge and methods needed to develop electrical applications.
Whether it is in the field of transports, motors, sensors, haptic systems or even energy transmission by induction, electrotechnics are present everywhere.
This course is not only addressed to our school's students, but also to anyone who is interested by electricity and would like to acquire sane and solid basic notions.
The various lessons aim at getting to know precepts of electricity and giving you a better comprehension of linear elements that constitute an electrical circuit.
As you will have understood by now, the course is meant as an approach of the essentials in electricity.
Through the electrotechnics I course, we will first cover the basics of electrical circuits composed of linear elements in a DC steady state and a series of transformation methods.
Secondly, we will introduce the AC steady state.
The electrotechnics I course will be followed up with the electrotechnics II.
This last one handles the AC steady state, the different types of power, as well as alternative three-phase systems and their load.
We will finally cover transient state, founding principles of switch-mode power supplies.
Different concrete examples will be used, which will help you link the theory to everyday life applications.
At the end of this course, you will know the main elements that compose an electrical circuit and will be able to analyse and resolve linear circuits in DC, AC steady state or transient state.
Each of the fourteen weeks of this course will be comprised of several lesson.
To test your knowledge, some quizzes will be inserted, in principle in each module.
This will help you make sure that you have assimilated the lesson's key points and to check your progression.
At the end of each lesson, we will give you a more complicated exercise that you will have to solve for the following week.
This exercise will be the same at that given to the EPFL students that follow the course in the classroom.
We hope that you will have a lot of pleasure following our electrotechnics course, and we invite you to our MOOC.
