In a previous episode, we introduced the conditional branch instruction if, and we saw that in order to work, such an instruction needs to express conditions.
The condition examples which we saw until now were relatively simple, they consisted for example in comparing the value of a variable with another value.
We are now going to examine the notion of condition in a more detailed way and see that, in Java, it is possible to express relatively complex conditions.
So, you here have an example of a conditional branching instruction, like we have already seen previously, and we see that in order to write this conditional statement, we need to express a condition, as we can see here.
Here the condition is a simple condition, which consists in comparing the value of a variable n with a constant, the constant 5.
Small syntactic note : the conditions in a conditional statement are, in Java, always enclosed in parentheses, which we concretely see here, in this small example.
Let's begin by examining in a more exhaustive way how we can, in Java, express simple conditions,
The objective of simple conditions is to compare two expressions, and for this effect we will use comparison operators.
We have already had the opportunity to come upon them several times in examples, like less than or greater than.
Java, in fact, offers a whole collection of predefined comparison operators, for example the less than operator lets us compare if the value of an entity is less than the value of another entity.
Let's suppose for example that I have two variables x and y, and that I want to know if the value of x is less than the value of y, I would use the comparison operator less than to perform this test, to express this condition.
In a similar way, I can use the operator == to verify if two entities have the same value.
For example, if I have once again two variables x and y, if I want to test if the value of x is the same as the value of y,
I would use == and would express my condition this way.
In a similar way, we also have the operators greater than or equal to, less than or equal to, and different than.
What you must know is that the evaluation of such an expression returns a boolean result, that is, the value "true" for true, and the value "false" for false. A small warning : the comparison operator to test if two values are equal is defined by two equal symbols.
Do not confuse it with the unique = symbol, which represents assignment.
Here in this example, I test if the value of n is 5.
This isn't what I'm doing when I write n
= 5; n = 5 means that I assign the value
5 to the variable n.
It should be noted that this kind of way of writing isn't tolerated by the compiler, in
Java, therefore here you'll have a compilation failure, if you write this kind of instruction.
Now let's illustrate, with small concrete examples, the use of simple conditions in Java.
Here we have the case of a small program which begins by declaring two variables a and b, by assigning to them initial values, respectively 1 and 2.
We now want to compare the values of a and b, to check if they're equal, and for this effect we have used a simple condition which uses the comparison operator ==.
Here, the values of a and b are different, which will has as a consequence that the evaluation of this expression will return "false".
We will therefore branch on the else part of the conditional statement, and execute this instruction, which will have as a consequence to print the message "Cas 2", as we see here.
Then let's continue the step by step execution, and we now want to compare the value of two times a with the value of b.
It should be noted that with simple conditions, we can compare not only the value of two variables, as it is the case here, but also the values of two expressions, in a more general sense.
If I evaluate two times a, I obviously get the value
2, the value 2 which is of course equal to the value of b, so the evaluation of this expression will return "true", this instruction, the following instruction, will therefore be executed, and "b est égal au double de a" will be printed. Note here that we are dealing with an expression that is relatively simple, when the expressions get more complex, to formulate conditions, it is recommended to use parentheses on the terms of the expressions to make them more readable.
Here for example, we could have begun to do it by adding a pair of parentheses around this term.
In another situation, we now want to compare the values of a and b to know if a is different from b.
As it is the case, the evaluation of this expression will return "true", we will therefore branch on the positive part of the if, the true part, and print "Cas 2".
If we continue in sequence, we now want to compare the value of two times a with the value of b, to test if two times a is different from b.
It isn't the case, so the evaluation of this expression will return "false", therefore we will branch the execution after the if instruction, as there isn't any else block, so nothing gets printed.
We have just seen how it is possible to express simple conditions in Java by using comparison operators.
In practice, it is often necessary to formulate more complex conditions, and therefore to combine simple conditions.
This is done with the help of logical operators.
For example, the AND logical operator, which in Java is defined by the double symbol &&, lets us verify if two conditions are simultaneously verified. We note that the logical operator requires two operands. The evaluation of the expression with the AND will return
"true" if and only if the evaluation of each operand also returns
"true".
Note that if suffices that one of the two operands returns "false", for example this one, and a fortiori the two, of course, for the entire expression to also return "false".
Second concrete example on the use of the logical operand AND.
Here we have the case of a small program, which asks the user to input a number, and we want this number to be between 1 and 10.
The number is read from the standard input, and stored in a variable n.
We want to verify that the number that the user inputs is indeed in line with our expectations, that is, that the number is between
1 and
10, we will consequently express a condition by imposing to the user that the entered number is greater than or equal to 1, and less than or equal to 10.
As each of these conditions must be verified, we will use the
AND logical operator.
Let's suppose initially that the user inputs a zero.
In this case, the evaluation of the first operand will return "false".
We have seen previously that it suffices that one of the operands is "false" for the entire expression with the AND logical operator to be "false", we will therefore branch on the else block of the conditional statement and print "incorrect", to show the user that the entered number doesn't fullfill the requirement.
Now let's suppose that the user inputs the value
5, in this case the evaluation of this first operand will return "true", as 5 is indeed greater than or equal to 1, the evaluation of this second operand will also return
"true", as 5 is indeed less than or equal to 10, consequently, as the two operands return "true", the entire expression will also return "true", and in this case we branch on the positive block, the true block of the conditional statement, and print the message "correct", to tell the user that the entered number fulfills our requirements indeed.
Other usual logical operator, the OR, which is defined in Java by a double vertical bar.
In the same way as the AND logical operator, the OR operator awaits two operands, which are two logical expressions returning "true" or "false".
For the entire expression to return "true", one or the other operand must return "true", a fortiori the two.
We see that in this case, if we want the logical expression to return "false", the two operands must return "false".
In all the other cases, the expression will return "true".
Now, here's a small concrete illustration of the use of the OR logical operator, let's suppose here that we have a small program which asks the user to enter two values, and we want one or the other of these values, at least, to be positive.
The two values are read on the standard input and are stored in two variables n and m.
We want one or the other of the entered values to be greater than zero, we shall therefore express a condition, it is sufficient that either m is greater than or equal to zero, or n is greater than or equal to zero.
As it is sufficient that one or the other of these conditions is verified, we will naturally use the OR logical operator.
Let's suppose that the user inputs the values -1 and 1, the evaluation of this first operand will return "true", as the value 1 is indeed greater than or equal to zero, and we have ween that it is sufficient that one or the other of the operands is
"true" for the entire expression to also be "true", therefore, we branch here on the positive block of the if instruction, and tell the user with a message, that indeed, at least one of the entered values is positive.
Now let's suppose that the user has entered the values -1 and -1, that is, two negative values, in this case the evaluation of this operand will obviously return
"false", the evaluation of this second operand also returns "false", and in this case, we're in the situation when the evaluation of the global expression returns "false", as the two operands are "false".
In this particular case, we will therefore branch on the else block of the conditional statement, and tell the user with a message that none of the two entered values are positive.
Last usual logical operator, the logical NOT, the negation, which in Java is defined by an exclamation mark.
Unlike the two other operators we have just seen, the NOT operator, the negation, is a unary operator, that is, it awaits only one operand.
It's purpose is to return the negation of the value of this operand.
For example, let's suppose that the evaluation of this operand returns "false", which concretely means that a would be greater than or equal to b, the negation of the value "false" will be "true".
Now let's suppose that the evaluation of this operand returns on the contrary
"true", in this case, the negation of "true" will be "false".
We'll have the opportunity to examine many examples of the use of the negation operator in the next lessons.
