Aerial monitoring is an ecological monitoring technique commonly used in protected areas, particularly in Africa where protected areas can be quite vast. 
It essentially relies on the use of an aircraft but other instruments can also be used like ULMs, drones, kites. 
Some conditions determine this choice of method. 
First, the protected area should be sizeable. 
This means that for a best cost effective or cost benefit ratio, monitoring a park of less than 1000 square kilometers,
100,000 hectares, should be ground-based.
The environment needs to be open, in deed, aerial monitoring is not adopted to closed area like forest or un-even terrain where the ground cannot be seen.
Finally, the species we look for need be visible from air, of course.
They would usually be the bigger mammals or species living in large herds like impalas or buffaloes in this case. 
You can also choose to monitor the floral distribution.
So the main objective of aerial monitoring is to be able to estimate the numbers and monitor the evolution of one or more spaces in time and in space by connecting periodic surveys. 
The aerial monitoring also gives a different perspective of the territory. 
A border and more comprehensive view compared to the traditional ground based monitoring, it is a good tool to better understand how the ecosystem works. 
It allows to confirmed the existence of certain species when they are hard to detect by other means. 
It provides an estimation of the numbers within the detected species as well as an estimation of the size or the structure of the groups. 
Obviously, it allows to understand the special distribution of the species in the park, and shows the evolutionary number and distribution when the counting is repeated overtime. 
When you have a map of the protected area's vegetation, aerial monitoring allows to connect the distribution of species and of different habitats. 
It also gives important additional information for management like signs of poaching, carcasses, the presence of cattle or human activities like gold mining, encroachment of the park boundaries and nogging for instance. 
There are many advantages to aerial flying. 
It is a reliable method that can be implemented rapidly.
It  mobilizes few staff members and allows to cover large surfaces.
Thanks to aerial flying, you can access usually, non-paroled territories and easily get a lot of geo-specific information.
This method is limited by the state of the area that shouldn't be too close, and also by some spaces that are being looked for. 
Some of them are difficult to detect because they live in the forest, so we cannot see them, or form uncountable herds like the baboons for instance or because they don't run away as the aircraft gets closer, so it's difficult to see them and they're difficult to spot, like the eland for instance. 
The one we see there. 
Aerials have an income also, of course, be costly, even though, this fact needs to be put  into perspective compared to other method and quality of obtaining results. 
Aerials surveying is done by transects, usually parallel lines fall by the aircraft. 
Most of the times several transects are covered during  flights and they are  oriented in a way to avoid having to face the same.
Generally speaking, the overflight takes place early in the morning or in the late afternoon, to avoid the hot hours of the day. 
Animals are counted (INAUDIBLE) on the ground that were calibrated on the plane during the preparation phase of the protocol. 
Aerial counts are made thanks to high-wind aircraft for better visibility on the ground.
The surveying team usually gathers four people including the pilot who follows the flight plan, the navigator will record the information given by the observers and controls the flight parameters and, two observers at the back, in charge of detecting the follow. 
The pilot, as this one, and the navigator, can also contribute to the survey by supporting the main observer, and the GPS will be programmed with all the transects before off. 
Sampling is the best way to proceed to aerial survey, because if you do the total count, there is a high risk of recounting moving animals especially when using several aircraft launched at the same time. 
The first step consist in defining a path on each side of the plane, generally between 100 and 250 meters large according to visibility you will have. 
You then calibrate the plane thanks to the banner that are attached to the the spars to define the path on the ground. 
The interval between transects then depends on the desired sampling rate you will wish to obtain.
During the overflights, only the animals within the path are to go into account which allows to calculate a theoretical density along with a standard deviation that is of greater magnitude when there are fewer contact points an when the counting effort is reduced. 
The sampling method requires simple statistical processing of data, following the Jolly method most of the time, this is explained in the second module about statistics in this MOOC.
The count usually covers 
10 to 20 % of the territory and the results can greatly vary from one season to another.
In order not to disrupt the flight, big herds are usually photographed for subsequent counting. 
Finally, using a geographical information system, allows to determine the distribution of animals within the protected area if the GPS positions of the observations are properly recorded.
Sources of aerial are due to the sampling rate.
The more transects there are, and the wider paths are, the more ground is covered and therefore, the position of the survey improves.
Some species will systematically be underestimated because  they're hardly visible from the plane like this lion for example.
For bigger herds, you need you need to force yourself to count only the animals present inside counting path. 
The meteorological conditions and visibility can also greatly affect the counting performance.
The experience of a people is essential to avoid identification.mistakes and to quickly being able to estimate the number of animal present. 
You also need to take into account that tiredness greatly affects attention after a while. 
Of course, you would need test of the ability of the observers to fly  without getting sick in often harsh conditions.
Finally, since it's a low level flight in a quite hostile environment, you need to have a prepared team to the possibility of an engine failure, that will lead into an emergency landing. 
Good luck. 
