Hello and welcome to today's course which is about protected areas staff training. 
For more information, you can check the guidelines of the 17th volume of the World Commission on Protected Areas on the subject.
Also, take a look at this practical guide developed by FIBA.
It is short, specific, and informative.
This is our colleague Elise Mazeyrac from
WCS in Gabon who will be helping me today.
She heads the CEDAMM training center in Lopé
National Park and trains many field practitioners.
Elise, why is training for Protected Areas so important?
Training is more than just learning, it is a tool to respond to changes and to respond accordingly in managing protected areas, so it is a strategic investment.
In Africa, the establishment of protected areas has unfortunately not always led to needed policy changes or much-needed training, and not often enough to good training of people recruited to implement these measures.
Furthermore, we too often see continued education as harm reduction, whereas the lack of initial training is the result of a lack of available courses tailored to the management of Protected Areas in Africa.
Training enables us to meet both qualitative and quantitative staffing requirements for the management of Protected Areas and their changing needs over time.
For the individual, learning these skills can strengthen personal motivation.
For a service provider, a Protected Area, or an institution in charge of the management of Protected Areas, training enables to face issues of staff turnover for some jobs or a lack of required skills.
Or it can motivate well-performing staff by opening up new career opportunities for them.
As the context of conservation evolves so do the skills expected from managers.
We understand that we need to think and plan ahead if we want to align training with needs, without forgetting the different categories of Protected Areas.
As we have seen in a previous module, training is more than teaching.
Prior to conducting training there needs to be the identification, analysis, and understanding of the context and needs, and the development of training activities according to a plan or a strategy which will specifically address these needs.
It is only then that the completion of the training itself can take place.
Finally, of course, the training must be assessed.
Actually, here we find the steps of the management-cycle of a Protected Area as we encountered them in our lesson on planning.
So now let's see if Africa has any specific needs for the people involved in terms of managing Protected Areas.
The needs of Protected Areas can differ wildly, but have common aspects, especially for countries in French-speaking
Africa where there are some specificities related to regional contexts.
Numerous studies have shown that needs can be classified into two broad categories.
First, the specific needs for the management of Protected Areas, for instance ecological monitoring, a knowledge of biodiversity, ecology, and planning, for management, anti-poaching, the rights of Protected Areas, of the environment, etc.
And then on the other hand, there are the so-called cross skills that are not specific to the management of Protected Areas, but which have a major impact on it.
For example, the management of human resources, the planning and financial management, logistics, mechanics, IT.
So in each of these categories, the tools and the level of skills expected will vary according to the position and context.
So, there many needs, which isn't really surprising.
But how can we respond effectively?
Training can be done in a room with a trainer, but can include many other aspects depending on the context such as the objectives and expected skills, or available means.
The first step is to plan training, by analyzing the context, the current situation, and the expected situation.
From there, it's possible to develop a training program which is as suitable as possible.
There are several methods for training.
There is obviously face-to-face training in a room with a trainer and a variety of teaching tools.
But there are also other ways such as distance learning be it with a tutor or in self-study like this
MOOC you are currently taking.
There's also training at the workplace, apprenticeships where the learner shares his or her time between periods of theory and practice.
Some courses confer diplomas or certificates whereas others only attest to training having been followed.
They can be done on site, in the Protected
Area, or in another place by relocating people.
They may be in a school, a university, a training center, and also in any place suited to the required needs.
Let's see what types of courses are offered to the managers of Protected Areas and their partners, e.g. at CEDAMM.
In CEDAMM with PAPACO and at Senghor University, we have developed a college degree on the management of Protected Areas.
In two months, this course covers eight modules of one-week each, many required priority skills which are specific to the planning, monitoring, and evaluation of the management, the rights of the environment.
It also includes techniques of inventory, practices, and concepts of ecology, etc.
There are also short courses, ad hoc training which last from several days to weeks, e.g., training in GPS navigation to the use of software such as SMART for monitoring the application of the law or the collection and analysis of data on large mammals in the forest.
It also serves to collect socio-economic data with tools like MARP, and BNS, or the use of picture traps for ecological monitoring.
We are always looking to develop flexible training which is reactive and based on tools and practical skills by involving more and more partners in conservation but not only that, also to meet the skill needs in Protected
Areas.
Finally, there is the difficult but essential question:
How do we measure the impact of such training in the field?
Measuring the impact of training on the field is essential.
This will assess and develop our training activities.
It is also a necessary step to measure whether or not the training has impacted the field, changed practices, or improved the ability to manage Protected Areas.
But it is often difficult to be sure that improvements in practices can be attributed to training.
And often the positive impacts are multifactorial: the availability of resources, internal recognition policy, team motivation etc.
But thanks to recent studies, with former graduates of our University Diploma, for instance, we can see there is a change in professional attitudes and in improvement in knowledge, and its practical implementation.
For example, the training in monitoring large mammals: more than half of those trained in this method in 2012 conducted ecological monitoring in the year following their training.
The courses also allow for personal development.
This is supported by a study conducted with graduates from our DU in Central
Africa, where 30% of graduates got a promotion within the 18 months following their training.
In the same way, every graduate said they feel more comfortable in their professional activities, and almost 3/4 have more responsibilities.
Finally, one of the effects of training which is too often underestimated is the fact that they lead to the networking of practitioners.
This networking continues beyond the time of training and leads to the sharing of practices and experiences.
It allows the creation and consolidation of a network of practitioners.
Well, that's the end of the class.
The next episode will focus on the specific management of marine Protected Areas.
Have a great day!
