This sequence will focus on marine protected areas.
We will look at the definition of a marine protected area, its key-features, why marine protected areas are created, their purpose, and lastly, the main challenges in the management and the creation of marine protected areas.
Let's look at the definition.
What is a marine protected area?
The first definitions were written at the Fourth World Parks congress in Caracas in 1992.
In 1999, IUCN adopted the following definition:
"Any area of intertidal or subtidal terrain, together with its overlying water and associated flora and fauna, historical and cultural features, which has been reserved by law or other effective means to protect part or all of the enclosed environment."
This is the definition that is commonly adopted and is found in most manuals and reference guides.
Note however, that in 2008, the IUCN congress adopted a new definition of protected areas.
This definition, to my mind, hightlights marine protected areas. they are a clearly-defined geographical space, recognized, dedicated, and managed through legal or other effective means to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values.
I want to emphasize three points:
First, it is a defined space, so delimitation is required.
This is a challenge for marine protected areas.
Note the strong emphasis on conservation.
Conservation is the primary objective of the protected area.
This implies a clear demarcation, in my opinion between sites that have as their main objective conservation, and sites for which the primary purpose may be sustainability or extraction of resources, such as fishing.
Note also that this space must be managed.
This involves management actions of the protected area.
There are now some 12,000 marine protected areas.
Coverage of 2.8% is the official figure given at the IMPAC Conference 3 in October 2013, held in Marseille.
I would emphasize that recent studies suggest even higher figures.
The Protected Planet Report 2014 mentions
Please note that until recently, we were talking of only 0.65% coverage of the oceans and seas as marine protected areas.
The number of MPAs therefore jumped from about 200 in the 1970s to over 12,000 today.
We've done well.
However, please note:
1) We're still well below the Aichi target of 10% by 2020 and 2) It remains to be seen that management is effective in all these protected areas.
Note also, on this map, that their distribution is very uneven.
Some regions have high coverage, such as Oceania, in particular.
Africa, on the other hand has less than 3% coverage in most countries.
There's a lot of work to to do, especially in Africa.
Let's see the characteristics of an MPA.
First of all I would like to emphasize that a marine protected area, is firstly a protected area.
The IUCN guidelines state that the same management principles apply, the same modes of governance can be applied to an MPA, for instance, a Community MPA.
So, all you have studied so far will apply to the marine protected area.
But let's have a look at some of its special features.
First, it is a fluid environment, which is open in three dimensions.
A marine protected area incorporates, in general, multiple ecosystems such as marine, terrestrial, and wetlands.
This makes things a little more complicated.
The value of a marine protected area is less visible, and is more difficult to quantify.
It is under water, hidden, and inaccessible.
The applicability of the principles of management frameworks is not always clear-cut, and these are often difficult, if not impossible, in the case of monitoring, for instance.
Also, note that the guides and manuals were often written for terrestrial protected areas with few references to marine specifics.
It is particularly difficult to control inputs and activities, to delineate areas and the installation of demarcation buoys in the marine environment is a special challenge and often impossible.
The level of scientific knowledge is considered less advanced than on terrestrial ecosystems as there's less education, less funding, and consequently, less knowledge.
Let's see now why we would create an MPA.
You will have noted that the first reason to create a marine protected area is the conservation of its resources, ecosystems, habitats, and species.
I know you're going to say that a marine protected area is pretty, and this is true, beauty and wellness is important for communities and for visitors and should not be overlooked.
But let's look at all the other reasons to create a marine protected area.
Among the many motivations alongside the goal of conservation,
MPAs have an important role to play in protecting marine and coastal biodiversity.
Known as "The blue planet", more than 70% of the surface of earth is covered by water and is the host to remarkable marine and coastal biodiversity and an important gene pool.
I would also point out that MPAs are one of the tools of coastal management.
As part of an integrated policy on the management of coastal areas,
MPAs play a fundamental role in managing and minimizing the pressures on the environment and resources so as to mitigate and reduce the impact of global change.
Look at this map: over 60% of the population lives in coastal areas.
This creates pressures, both in terms of urban planning and in terms of pollution and waste.
Here we have the global map of human impacts on marine ecosystems.
You can see that certain areas of the globe are particularly impacted.
Finally, here's a world map on climate risk.
Take a look at this map which highlights the pressures and the multiple effects of global change and climate change.
So you will understand that the coastal zone is subject to strong pressures, and it plays a vital part in fighting these.
I'll refer here to the role of mangroves in mitigating the impacts of natural disasters, such as tsunamis or cyclones.
In terms of motivation, I would stress the importance of marine and coastal natural resources for the food and economic security of local populations.
The MPAs, through their fishery resources, also contribute to the economic development of countries.
Note that many MPAs were created with that goal in mind, such as preserving the breeding grounds and nurseries, thus being one of tools of fishery management.
However, this graph makes it quite clear that fish stocks decline sharply, and that they are either fully exploited, as seen in the yellow column, or overexploited, as seen in the the orange column, and the brown band represents those for which the stocks have collapsed.
None of the commercially exploited species are seeing their stocks grow at present.
Let's look now at the main challenges in the creation and management of a marine protected area.
Firstly, these aim to strengthen the management capabilities of marine protected areas.
Training, awareness, and exchanges on the ground are important.
This is so as to better define the values and the effects of an MPA.
I invite you, if you have time to read over these references.
One of the challenges too is to establish coherent and representative networks of MPAs.
Here, the example of the network of marine protected areas in West Africa called RAMPAO.
Note also the Mediterranean network, MedPAN, applies.
These networks have a charter and governance, and they implement capacity-building activities, grants, exchanges and sharing.
They have a strong role to play, both representing MPAs with policies and with international donors.
Finally, in terms of challenges, one of the main challenges right now is to create marine protected areas on the high seas in areas which are very little protected.
The other challenge of course is funding, finding how to finance the creation of marine protected areas and their management.
That's it, this sequence is completed, and there's a lot in it.
I invite you to read the background documents.
For more, go and visit a marine protected area, and go and talk to their managers to find out more.
Good day.
