Hello and welcome to this slightly different class on the conservation of plant & animal species inside protected areas.
For more information, on IUCN's website you can read about the Red
List that we'll talk about.
You can also read this leaflet that briefly explains what the red list is and how it works.
Our colleague Jean-Christophe Vié from the
IUCN headquarters in Switzerland will be with us today.
He's the assistant director of the IUCN Species
Program.
So, why are those plant and animal species important to consider in the management of protected areas?
All wildlife, whether plant or animal, is what defines the wealth of the protected area.
Each species has a specific role in the ecosystem.
It's the changes to the species inside the protected area that allow us to measure the performance of the area's management.
So, it's an important parameter since protected areas are mostly created to preserve biodiversity across the planet.
Hence, following the changes in multiple species, that will become our witnesses over time, will allow us to know if we've been correctly managing the protected area.
There are some species though, that are more important than others in assessing certain aspects of the management inside and around protected areas.
Inside each area, there are species more charismatic than others, that will draw tourists, that will become symbols, will provide a specific service, such as disseminating certain plant species, becoming a sort of gardener to the forest; take for instance elephants, in many African protected areas.
Those species are often seen as success indicators.
So, we won't be following every species present in the protected area, we're going to pick a few species in particular to create good indicators, indicators that we will follow, and that will define the results of the management.
Some of those species are the ones that are targeted by activities such as poaching, as it is the case right now in a lot of places, in many African protected areas.
Not all species are targeted.
Don't forget that protected areas are also a biodiversity reservoir for the surrounding areas, and will contribute to the food security of the local inhabitants and communities.
Some species are particularly important, but others can be a source of management constraints that can take many forms.
Jean-Christophe explains this.
The role of protected areas is to guard a region's biodiversity but, of course, there are species that create problems for the managers.
Some are caused by the nature of the species itself.
An elephant needs a lot of land, carnivores need preys, this can cause problems with the neighboring communities.
This creates an issue to manage.
On the other hand, issues can also come from the attractive species that allow the development of tourism activities, that people come to see.
From the outside, as well, the following can occur: species can come from around the area and become invasive, settling in the heart of the parks creating pretty serious damages to the integrity of the protected area.
Various species can cause very different management issues and those are often very specific cases.
Among the species found in protected areas, like this crowned crane, how can we tell which are especially threatened and what special measures should be taken for its protection?
To identify the threatened species in a protected area, and then decide which protection measures to take, there is a tool, that the IUCN has been working on for the last 50 years, it's the red list of threatened species.
For a lot of categories of species, we know where are the threatened ones, what is threatening them, and we know what to do to help them.
Whole categories of species have been evaluated such as all mammals, all birds, all amphibians.
In Africa, we work specifically on the biodiversity of fresh water sources.
All the species of aquatic plants, of dragonflies, of fish, of crustaceans, have been evaluated.
With that data, we know where the endangered species congregate, where the threats are the strongest, this allows us, for instance, to say which zones are the most important in protecting biodiversity.
This tool exists, it is available online, you need to get familiar with it.
The basis is a set of criteria that have been crafted over many decades so they are very robust.
We have five criteria for animals, to sort them in various categories of threat.
The worst scenario is extinction, and the best is the category "least concern".
Unfortunately, for a large number of species, we still don't have enough data, they are in the category "insufficient data", maybe they haven't been studied yet.
It's a huge task.
The type of species that people are most familiar with —in the animal kingdom— have been assessed.
So we have information available for Africa.
We still have a lot of work to do on plants and invertebrates.
Let's see in a few words, how is the red list updated in practice?
The list is compiled by the UICN, by experts, sometimes, by associate organisations.
This is how it works: we rely on experts, we don't do research ourselves, we build on the research that has been done over decades, and sometimes centuries.
And we plan expert meetings.
We've done quite a few of them in Africa already.
We get the best experts together for a given group of species, for instance fresh water fish.
We plan a meeting and, together, we review every species from the region and we sort them in the right category.
In practice, what are the possible uses of the red list?
The red list has a lot of applications.
It helps create action plans, which means that from the data we have on groups of species, we can determine, and identify the threats, the priority habitats, which will guide the management of protected areas.
We can also use the red list as an indicator of the state of biodiversity, even for particular species.
We've just published a paper on the state of ungulates around the world, which showed that the preservation of nature has a colossal impact, the situation would've been much worse if nothing had been done, if there hadn't been any conservation measures.
So, we've documented the conservation effort.
Also, on the global level, this allows us by doing more complex analyses of the red list data, to identify the areas that are a priority in terms of conservation.
The species where we have a unique biodiversity, unique species, only found in one area.
So this guides our strategy in creating new protected areas.
We help identifying zones, for example, where there are species, endangered or not, that do not have any form of protection.
It's important to get acquainted with the red list, that you check the website at the address shown here, for a few species that you already know or for an entire set of species.
It's an essential tool to prioritize the conservation activities in protected areas as we've seen in Module 2 when we talked about gap analysis.
This is the end of the lesson.
The next episode will focus on tourism in protected areas.
Have a nice day.
