Hello.
Each and everyone of us makes daily a set of travels.
To go to work, for shopping, for recreation.
These travels are part of our daily life and we do not often realize their complexity.
The practical exercises we offer throughout this course aim to make you aware and analyze this complexity.
Thus, at the end of each week of classes, we offer you to explore your own daily mobility and to report through its extent, then to analyze the information gathered.
Exercises are cumulative, and each week the course brings new elements that will allow each student to build throughout the weeks his own mobility profile.
In this context, the objectives of these exercises are first to assimilate theoretical lessons and examples of the different courses, then to analyze one's own mobility and understand its springs and finally, to discover the mobility of other students and get in touch with them through Peer Reviewing systems.
Each student will first have to perform the exercise and then will evaluate two other students' work.
In the first week of classes, each student will establish his own daily mobility profile.
He will describe his travels for a whole week, describing the places of origin and destination of his travels, describing the modes of transport used and evaluating the time spent in such transportation.
On this basis, we propose, in the weeks that follow, to gradually add additional topics.
How do you spend your travel time?
What has allowed you to achieve these trips?
And what are the travels you could have or wanted to achieve?
What are the reasons that have prevented you in doing so, what justifies your modal choice, is it possible to experiment with other modes of travel for a week, what is the adhesion of the transit stop in common nearest to you and finally, how would you imagine an optimized transport system in your city ?
In addition to these cumulative exercises based on your mobility profile, you will also have to answer a series of quizzes.
Some will aim to help you assimilate items presented in each module and thus will not be marked.
But they will be mandatory in order to pass the course.
Others will aim to assess your knowledge and note your progress in the assimilation of the course modules.
