[BLANK_AUDIO]
Hello and welcome to the course about
Household
Water Treatment and Safe Storage An
Introduction to HWTS.
Make yourself comfortable.
Would you like something to drink?
Glass of water?
I don't know where you are but I'm sure you have access to drinking water otherwise you wouldn't be taking this course.
But is that water really safe to drink?
Is it safe when it comes out of the tap?
Or out of the well or the stream?
Is it safe after you've collected it and stored it in your house for a while?
Well, unfortunately for many people around the world the water they drink is not always safe.
And this is true in poor countries like
Ethiopia and Nepal but also in transition countries like Uzbekistan or Bolivia and even in parts of rich countries like England or the USA.
My name is Rick Johnston and I study drinking water in developing countries.
How safe it is what makes it unsafe and how it can be protected and improved.
One way that people can improve their drinking water quality is to treat it themselves at the household level.
And that's the subject of this online course.
An Introduction to Household Water
Treatment and Safe Storage.
I started this course while I worked at eawag the Swiss Federal Institute for
Aquatic
Science and Technology which is the WHO collaborating center for sanitation and water in developing countries.
Within eawag I worked at Sandec The
Department of Water and Sanitation in
Developing Countries.
And the aim of Sandec is to develop or adapt concepts and technologies for application in developing countries with a range of research and implementation partners to improve sustainable access to good quality water and sanitation services.
During the preparation of this course I moved from Sandec to the World Health
Organization in Geneva.
But this MOOC remains a product of Sandec along with EPFL the Swiss Institute of
Technology in Lausanne.
This course is the first in a series of eLearning initiatives jointly developed by
Sandec and EPFL, which will cover the full range of Sandec research activities.
This course will run for five weeks.
And at the beginning of each week we'll release approximately one hour of video lectures divided into short modules usually around 10 or 15 minutes long.
The videos contain quizzes where you can test your knowledge about the materials being presented and you'll also be able to get PDF copies of the presentations and English transcription and a French translation.
Each module will start with an introduction slide like this one.
Here you can see that today I will show you the course outline.
We'll talk about quizzes and homework and the course forum.
Let's start with a look at the course outline.
The first week of course is an introduction.
We'll start by exploring why it could be useful to treat drinking water at the household level.
We'll talk about the global burden of disease discuss how drinking water can become contaminated and get a brief introduction to the technologies used in household water treatment.
In the second and third weeks we'll go through these technologies in more detail with examples of actual applications from around the world.
But the course isn't only about technologies.
We'll also look at implementation strategies which are successful or not.
We'll consider how a household water treatment can be targeted to particular vulnerable groups such as in the emergencies or through schools.
And in the final week we'll look at monitoring and evaluation both of technologies and their implementation in the field.
Especially in this week we will draw on some useful documents and programs produced by the WHO.
Most of these lectures will be delivered by me but we will have a few special guests from experts in the United
Nations or leading research institutions.
This course is an introduction we won't get into much detail about these topics but we will always try to point you towards websites or documents where you can get more information.
Quizzes and homework.
Many of the modules will include short in-video quizzes which are not graded.
But at the end of each week there will be an assignment which counts toward the course grade.
At the ends of weeks one two and four this will be a quiz which will be automatically graded.
After week three you'll have a peer-reviewed assignment in which you will need to apply the knowledge that you've learned so far towards a realistic scenario.
And after week five you will take a final exam.
I will even tell you one of the questions right now.
I'm a nice guy.
You will have to tell me what this thing is and how it is used in household water treatment.
If you complete the assignments and the final exam successfully by the deadline you will receive a
Statement of Accomplishment.
Let's first take our first in-video quiz right now.
You can find all relevant information about the course such as grading policies and information about the peer-review assignments on the course site.
We've also developed a forum section where you can comment and discuss about the course.
There's a General Discussion Forum and three further forums with content specific purposes.
In the General Discussion Forum you can share your reactions to the course material as it's presented and if you have your own experiences about household water treatment this is the place to share them.
Study Groups Forum is a platform where you can find friends and arrange meet-ups and please invite your friends to the course to create learning groups and discuss the topics.
The Lectures Forum is for specific questions about the lectures.
And Exercise Forum is for specific questions and clarifications about the quizzes the peer-graded assignments and the final exam.
Finally there are two course specific forums where you can communicate any course material errors and technical issues.
At the end of each module there's a summary slide like this one.
And at the end of each week there is also a short summary module to give a recap of the week's modules.
I'm looking forward to the course and to hearing your contributions in the forums.
Let's start the course now with a module about the diseases that are caused by unsafe drinking water.
