Hello, my name is Rich Johnston, and I started this course when I was working in the Sandec Department at the Eawag.
Now I work for the 
World Health Organization in the WHO Unisef Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
And I am Sara Marks, research scientist at Eawag and a group leader of the Water Supply and Treatment group.
My team works in countries in Africa and Asia to improve drinking water quality through developing innovative treatment solutions.
And one way that people can improve drinking water quality themselves is to treat it at the household level.
And that's the topic of this course, an Introduction to Household 
Water Treatment and Safe Storage.
(Sara) This course is the first and a serious e-learning initiative jointly developed by Sandec and EPFL, which will cover the full range of Sandec research activities,
Household Water Treatment, 
Sanitation Planning
Solid Waste Management and Faecal Sludge Management.
This course will run for five weeks.
At the beginning of each week
We'll release approximately one hour of video lectures divided into short modules.
(Rich) The first week, of course, is an Introduction.
We'll start by exploring why it could be useful to treat drinking water at the household level.
We'll talk about the global burden of disease, discuss how drinking water can be contaminated and get a brief introduction to the technologies used in household water treatment.
In the second and third week we'll go through these technologies in more detail with examples of actual applications from around the world.
But the course is not only about technologies.
We'll also look at Implementation Strategies, which are successful or not, we'll consider how household water treatment can be targeted to particular vulnerable groups, such as in emergencies or through schools.
And in the final week we'll look at monitoring and evaluation both of the technologies and their implementation in the field.
You can find all relevant information about the course on the course website.
There is also an online discussion forum, where you can add your comments about the course and the lectures, form study groups, even share your experiences about household water treatment.
On Sandec Youtube webpage you'll also find the lectures for each course and our WASH in 
Developing Countries online series.
We're looking forward to the course and hearing your contributions on the online forum.
So let's get started now with the module about the diseases caused by unsafe water.
