[BLANK_AUDIO]
In this module, we'll talk about diseases caused by unsafe water, sanitation, and hygiene, and how they can be classified, as well as the burden of disease due to unsafe water, sanitation, and hygiene, both in terms of deaths or mortality and disease or morbidity.
They say that three things in life are certain, birth, taxes and death, and somehow some people have managed to avoid taxes.
But deaths are inevitable.
There are about 55 million people who die every year.
But there are even more people who have babies every year, about a 135 million new babies are born each year.
So that means that overall there's about a
1.1% increase in the global population each year and the population will double every 60 years at current rates.
One useful way to classify diseases was proposed by the authors of the 1972 classic book
"Drawers of Water". according to environmental transmission pathways.
This so called Bradley Classification includes four types, water-borne, water-washed, water-based, and water-related diseases.
Now, some of those 55 million deaths per year are caused, at least in part, by unsafe water, sanitation, and hygiene.
And we can think about different ways to classify those diseases.
First we can talk about the water-borne diseases, which are diseases caused by actually drinking, ingesting water that has some pathogens in it.
These include the diarrheal diseases caused by different pathogens: rotavirus, cholera, shigella or cryptosporidium. but also Hepatitis A and E, and even Polio can be transmitted through drinking water.
For any of these water-borne diseases, an intervention to reduce the disease then, could involve improving the water quality.
Next we have the water-washed diseases, which are caused by poor hygiene due to lack of water, rather than by direct ingestion.
Most water-borne diseases are also water washed, because they can be transmitted through hands and contact with other surfaces.
Trachoma is the leading cause of preventable blindness globally, and is transmitted by flies, which land on people's faces.
And acute respiratory infections are also transmitted through contact with pathogens on hands and other surfaces.
Water-washed diseases can be reduced by increasing the amount of water that's available to improve hygiene.
Water-based diseases are those caused by parasites which live part of their lifecycle in water.
The most serious of these is schistosomiasis or bilharzia which affects 160 million people globally, mostly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Another serious water based disease is guinea worm or dracunculiasis, which is a horrible disease, which used to affect many people, 3.5 million people in
1986, but cases are now down to only 542 in 2012.
And those are confined to about four countries.
Mainly in South Sudan.
For water-based diseases, control mechanisms involved targeting the aquatic organism host and protecting surface water bodies from contamination.
Finally, there are water related disease, which are caused by insects which breed in water, especially mosquitoes.
The most important of these is malaria which affects about 250 million people each year, causing about 589,000 deaths.
The great majority of those are in sub-Saharan
Africa and affect children under the age of five.
Another important mosquito disease is
Dengue fever which is growing in numbers and can cause explosive outbreaks especially in urban areas.
In both cases the mosquitoes breed in certain types of water and a control mechanism is to remove their habitat.
So in summary, there are many diseases which are caused, at least partially, by unsafe water, sanitation and hygiene.
Water-borne diseases are those that are caused by directly drinking, or ingesting contaminated water.
And those diseases can be controlled, at least partially, by treating the water at the household.
Household water treatment though shouldn't be expected to have an impact on other diseases that are water washed, water based, or water related.
Now let's take a little break.
You see on your screen five different infectious diseases and I'd like you to think for a minute about which of them cause more or less deaths each year.
Arrange them in the order of numbers of deaths per year and then click the next slide.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
The most recent global mortality figures were released by the WHO in 2013 and estimate deaths over the years 2000 to
You can see that lower respiratory infections such as pneumonia were by far the largest cause of death among these diseases in 2011.
Diarrheal disease caused about 1.9 million deaths, followed by tuberculosis, malaria, and measles.
Now take a moment to click on the link to the WHO website where these data are available.
Download the Excel file called "Global
Summary"
Estimates, and look at the summary tab.
How have the numbers in this table changed since 2000?
If you compare the numbers you will see that measles, for example, has declined tremendously to about a quarter the level of 2000.
Since diarrhea causes 1.9 million deaths per year, it is the most important of the water sanitation and hygiene related diseases.
It's also a water-borne disease, so water quality is important in its transmission.
The burden disease from diarrhea is large.
It causes about 3.5% of all deaths globally, and if you look at children under age five, the number rises to 9.3%.
Diarrheal disease is second only to acute respiratory infections in terms of disease burden.
There are important non-infectious diseases; such as heart disease, stroke and lung problems, which effect many people also.
Now the 2011 figures have just been released by
WHO and are not yet desegregated by risk cause.
So we can't say how many of those 1.9 million deaths are due to unsafe water sanitation and hygiene.
But in the previous round of estimates from 2004, this analysis was made.
And WHO estimated that about 88% of the then 2.2 million deaths per year were attributable to poor water, sanitation and hygiene.
So it's clear then that poor water, sanitation and hygiene have a major impact on the global burden of disease, especially through diarrheal disease.
So far we've been talking about burden of disease in terms of deaths or mortality.
But it's also important to consider sicknesses which can greatly reduce the quality of life, or morbidity.
We can do this through a metric that's called disability adjusted life years, or DALYs.
What DALYs do is combine two aspects, first, the years of life lost in comparison to a standard life expectancy and second the years lost to disability which are number of years you live with a disability times a weight for how serious that disability is.
Well, lets consider this with some examples.
First consider a person who has a normal life expectancy of 80 years and has no particular disabilities and this person lives a fully healthy life for 80 years and has zero years of life lost, or years lost to disability.
So they have no DALYs.
Second, let's consider an example, where someone also lives, has a life expectancy of 80 and lives a very normal life to begin with, but then has some kind of sudden accident at age
70, and dies prematurely.
Then they have years of life lost.
How many?
10 years of life lost.
There's no disability here, so then the number DALYs is10.
Okay.
This time, let's consider a person who has a normal healthy life until age 50 when they have some kind of accident which leads to loss of a foot, amputation of the foot.
Now the disability weight for a foot amputation is 0.3.
So it goes up to there but then that person lives to the expected life expectancy of 80.
So here we have years of life lost to disability.
How many?
30 years from age 50 times a weight of 0.3 for foot amputation.
There's a total of 9.
So that's nine DALYs.
Finally, a more complicated example, is a person who lives a normal life until age 36, when they contract HIV/AIDS.
Full blown AIDS without any medicine, without antiretroviral therapy, has a weight of
But after four years that person then is able to get medication and have a much better quality of life with a weight of 0.167.
Then that person lives until age 70, dying prematurely.
46, 36, then 40.
So here we have years lost to disability and here we have years of life lost.
How many?
Ten years of life lost.
How many years lived with disability.
We have four at that high rate.
That's a total of two, plus 30 at a lower rate.
That's five.
For a total of seven.
So then the DALYs, plus ten plus seven, for 17.
So you can imagine the diarrheal disease then, which impacts, very young children in many cases will also have a high contribution to DALYs because of the large number of years of life lost.
Now that we have a metric for morbidity, the DALYs we can examine the overall burden of disease posed by diarrhea, and compare it to other diseases globally.
Now, that 2013 WHO report about deaths, globally, hasn't yet been analyzed to develop DALY estimates, so we have to look at an older
WHO report from 2008 shown up here.
Where they reported that diarrheal disease caused over 52 million DALYs per year, which again the distribution was very similar to the mortality numbers we've seen, with a little bit more than 3% of the global total, and about 9% of the burden of disease for children.
This report also listed, country-wise,
DALYs.
And you could see that India was by far the, the largest country in terms of DALYs, in terms of disease burden, followed by other large countries, China,
Nigeria,
Pakistan, and the Democratic Republic of
Congo, which all had more than 3 million DALYs.
In fact, in DRC the contribution of diarrheal disease to the overall disease burden was more than 10% of all DALYs.
So far we've been talking about numbers generated by the WHO, either their
2000 report on mortality or earlier reports for morbidity or risk factors.
But there is another large, important and recent data set out there.
It's called the Global Burden of Disease
2010 Study and it was done by the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation, or IHME, based in Seattle,
Washington.
The GBD 2010 Study was a massive undertaking involving hundreds of scientists from all around the world including many WHO researchers.
However even though it uses a similar approach to the WHO models, WHO hasn't endorsed the findings, in part because of some methodological differences and in part because they weren't given access to the data and the findings to validate them before publication.
Some of the main differences between the two studies are that first IHME calculated new disability weights for various health conditions.
This was done through a participatory online process, as well as through field surveys in a number of countries.
Second, while WHO considered hygiene, water and sanitation risks
IHME found that the data available for, hygiene practices, nationally representative data sets, were too weak, so they decided not to include this risk factor.
And then finally, in the IHME model, people accessing a basic level of water and sanitation, such as improved sources of water like a bore hole or protected spring, or improved sanitation, the basic pit latrine.
They were considered to suffer no burden of disease due to their water and sanitation.
This was not the approach followed in the
WHO models.
Nonetheless, this was a massive and important undertaking, and we can learn a lot through its findings.
Let's take a look at them.
Let's take a look at the GBD 2010 data from the IHME website.
You can find it just by searching for
IHME.
And then let's go straight to their data visualization.
[SOUND]
They have many different visualization tools, we'll look at GDB Compare.
Now in GBD Compare this is what's called a
Tree Map and if you hover over different diseases you can see the percent of their contribution to the burden of disease.
Here let's put a focus on diarrheal disease.
Now that box will always have a square around it and we can change between DALYs and deaths.
We can look at global or specific countries or regions.
We can change years.
We can see that if we look at under five children, the contribution of diarrheal disease is much larger.
So you can you can find out a lot of things from this kind of map.
Down below, we have different options for secondary visualizations.
We could look at a time plot for instance and see the number of deaths decreasing over time.
Here is shown as rates or as numbers decreasing from 1.7 million under five deaths in 1990, to about 666,000 in 2010.
We can also look at a map and see which countries have greater or lesser burdens of disease.
Here we can see that India, with 150,000 child deaths, is by far the largest contributor to the disease.
But, if we looked at rates, then we would see higher rates in
Sub-Saharan Africa and the same if we look at proportion of
DALYs.
If we compare the GBD 2010 numbers to the
WHO estimates, there is some similarities and some differences.
IHME predicts 1.5 million diarrheal deaths per year which is a little bit lower than WHO's 1.9 million.
However they predict a higher number of
DALY's.
WHO was at 52 million, though that was an older figure.
The highest ranking countries remain
India, DRC, Nigeria, Pakistan, countries with large populations and moderate or poor water sanitation and hygiene.
China in this model though has a relatively lower burden of disease compared to the earlier
WHO estimates.
One of the biggest differences, though, is that in the IHME model, only 25% of the diarrheal deaths are caused by poor water and sanitation.
So, water and sanitation, as a risk factor, accounts for less than 1% of the burden of disease.
And this is, in large part, because hygiene wasn't included in the IHME models and we'll see when the recent WHO figures are updated to include DALYs and risk factors, how those numbers compare.
So in summary, we have a couple different data sets for burden of disease.
From WHO, we have the recent numbers about mortality, which include data and maps and you have earlier reports with mortality, as well as morbidity and risk factors.
From IHME, you have data and maps and risk factors and really nice visualization tools.
What both of these data sets tell us is that the burden of disease from unsafe water sanitation and hygiene is high and that diarrheal disease is the leading contributor to that disease burden both in terms of morbidity and mortality.
You can now access these reports or websites to get more detailed information if you need.
In our next module we'll be looking at some of the specific pathogens that cause diarrheal diseases in drinking water.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
