In this module we'll talk about the
Millennium Development Goals.
What they are?
Where safe water fits into them?
And how household water treatment and safe storage is related to the MDGs.
The Millennium Development Goals, or MDGs.
Our set of eight, well goals, that were established by
United Nations member states in the year
2000, the millenium.
And set a development agenda for the next
15 years.
In most cases they tried to set specific targets for each of the goals.
Which could be measured, and would be ambitious, but still could be achieved.
Within the time frame.
Now these goals are, are very broad they cover poverty and hunger, primary education, gender equality and women's empowerment.
Child mortality, maternal health, severe diseases, environmental sustainability and a global partnership for development.
Now you might think, well what about water and sanitation?
Where to they fit into the MDGs?
Well, where would you put safe water and sanitation?
[BLANK_AUDIO]
Well, water and sanitation are found under goal seven, ensure environmental sustainability.
There's a target there.
7C.
Which is to have, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
Obviously, the main goal of HWTS is to improve drinking water quality at the household level.
This is most important when there are many risks of fecal contamination along the drinking water chain.
Many of those threats lie outside the household, and in the long run should be best addressed through source protection and development of high quality water supply.
HWTS doesn't replace the obligation of service providers to provide sustainable access to safe drinking water.
It's more of a stop gap measure for people who don't yet have access to high quality drinking water in the home.
For people who need to collect water from public points.
Or who accessed piped water, which is not fully reliable, for example, due to intermittent operation and contamination in the distribution system.
So HWTS can contribute to the safety of drinking water but it doesn't improve access, the quantities available or the sustainability of the water supply.
So if people who rely on unimproved water sources such as rivers or ponds are able to use HWTS sustainably and effectively to improve water quality at home, it may be safe, but it still wouldn't be the same as sustainable access to safe drinking water as in MDG target seven C.
This would in fact, transfer responsibility from the service providers to the consumers.
Which wouldn't be fair.
So, HWTS can contribute towards MDG 7, but also towards the other MDGs.
Especially the health related ones.
Unsafe drinking water is a major risk factor for under five mortality, MDG 4.
As well as people living with HIV/AIDS,
MDG 6.
Contaminated water is also linked with malnutrition, so
HWTS can have an indirect impact on MDG 1.
And since children often miss school when they're suffering from diarrheal disease, HWTS can have an indirect contribution towards MDG 2.
So in conclusion, HWTS contributes to the
MDG target on safe drinking water, but also toward other
MDG targets, especially the health-related ones.
However, HWTS alone doesn't guarantee sustainable access to safe drinking water and so it shouldn't be considered as an indicator for target 7C.
