Hello.
Welcome to the module on the international network on household water treatment and safe storage.
I am Michael Forson the co-host to the network.
And I work with UNICEF.
In this module we are going to look at the issue, what triggered the network?
Actually, the question is why the network?
Then, we will look at the network strategy, the core elements of the strategy, its mission, objectives, targets.
We will look at the hosting and then the implementation arrangement.
And the membership, what are the benefits when you join the network and also some of the achievements.
Then the challenges.
You know as every institution or every organization have some challenges, what is working, what worked and what didn't work, and some of the relevant information.
Okay, the question is, the issue, a large part of the world population is without access to drinking water.
You know, in 2010, when the joint management program for UNICEF and WHO announced that the world has met the target on drinking water, for the millennium development goals specifically target three of the MDG goal seven.
It was a big joy, but however, looking at it critically you will see that there are still people without access to safe drinking water.
Again, by definition of the MDG targets, I mean the definition, it indicates that it actually looks at the type of water source by its construction.
So, that means we're not very much sure, about the quality of the water as they drink.
And I must emphasize here that clean water or clear water is always not safe water.
We s, we can say that as of 2011, there were still 768 million people without access to safef drinking water.
And then more billions also are not having access to the safe drinking water itself.
Again, millions are served by unreliable pipe systems and are forced to store water in drinking in certain continents, which really puts a risk to contaminate the water.
Millions are also affected by emergency situations, which in directly affect the water and sanitation systems, broken down water systems.
Therefore a potential risk to the safety of the drinking water.
Then we realize that diarrhea being the major cause of child mortality it's also dependent on drinking water.
If we look at the equation for the diarrhoea reduction, safe drinking water actually takes about
30% of the variables.
So the question is why a network?
In February 2003, WHO convened a multi-stakeholder meeting, to really think through, what is the best platform that stakeholders should come together, to address the issues that
I mentioned in the previous slide.
And after deliberations, they agreed that a network would be the best forum to be used.
The advantages of a network is that a network is a forum.
It's an information clearing house and vehicle to move, to promote collective, bilateral and individual action as part of the stakeholders.
That means, it's more like an all-inclusive clearing house so everybody have a say.
Again it co, it encourages communication and cooperation.
So whenever you want to see South-South corporation,
South-North cooperation, the network can really do that.
And again as a network, we can really monitor and map the global efforts, to inform advocacy, implementation and investment.
Then, we can also raise awareness about,
HWTS, its rule and make the understanding how one should understand it, and the supports to government in making decisions regarding, household water treatment and safe storage.
Then again, we are to, as, as a network, we can conduct agreed targeted researches which are coordinated to really give us, I mean, evidence as to how best we can win the health impact on
HWTS.
On this slide, we see
I wanted to portray the timeline how the network has really fed.
In Phase one, which was actually from 2003 to 2008, we saw the time of planning, more of a thinking through and so forth.
During that time, WHO was the sole host of the network.
After 2008.
UNICEF and WHO released their seven point strategy for comprehensive diarrrhea control and management.
And then the network adapted this as the key or the basis to really move the agenda.
There was a strategic meeting or consultation during the f the, the, the interface.
And it was a [INAUDIBLE] strategic meeting.
Now it was agreed that UNICEF and WHO would co-host it.
So, that gave birth to the second phase in
2011 where WHO and UNICEF co-hosted a platform and we've had a couple or a number of original meetings.
So, we can now see, in 2014, where we are now.
Now, that network every organization or every, institutions, you have a vision.
So, to the network, our mission is to contribute to a significant reduction in water-borne and related vector-borne diseases, especially among vulnerable populations, by promoting HWTS as a key component of community targeted environmental health programs.
Our focus is on vulnerable population, people affected by HIVs, people who are disenfranchised.
People who are malnourished, people who are, I mean, but, but, just, I mean, in, inequality, being affected by inequality.
And again, we are trying to, our mission is also to look at, trying to, eh, make an integrated effort.
To leverage other more environmental health programs because we talking about what, the equation of the diarrhea reduction.
It's not only safe water, but then there are other elements in that.
The objectives of the network, the HWTS network has the following four objectives and three targets.
The objectives and targets are shaped around the three core areas that the network derives its strength.
Advocacy, communication, research and implementation and scaling up.
The objectives is actually to HWTS, will be used as an evidence base of public health.
The evidence base of HWTS as a public health intervention.
Will really be strengthened.
And it is our objective also that there will be tangible reasons.
For scaling up HWTS activities globally.
Then, we looking at national policies and institutional frameworks to be developed as part of the environmental health interventions.
Then also to disseminate best practices in
HWTS across the group.
We have three key targets.
The first target is that by 2015 thirty countries should have established policies on household water treatment and safe storage.
By 2015 we are expected that they will strengthened, we are expecting that they will be strengthened evidence to guide effective and replicable HWTS activities and approaches which will give, which will influence Long-term widespread and use and its public health impact.
And also, by 2020, we are hoping that 50 countries should have achieved a country-wide scale up of project-based HWTS.
In terms of participation, we currently have over 160 membership drawn from various organizations, the academia, The
United
Nations agencies, governments and so forth.
There are a number of benefits if you join the network.
One is it connects you to a global network of HWTS.
That's what we are, you meet with experts, senior officials, program implementers, researchers, and on the ground implementers.
And again you will receive the latest news on the HWTS project as it evolve.
There are meetings and events through which the Network really share information.
We have a Network listserv and a newsletter that really give you up-to-date information.
Then again, you'll be able to know who is active where, and how to engage with other partners if you're are planning for HWTS interventions.
Then, you also benefit from having your work disseminated and highlighted in the network communication material.
You will have also a voice in the annual network meeting and therefore have an input into the annual work plan.
Then you have access to an online, interactive webspace to share files and discuss matters of interest with Network participants.
We have this arrangement with the Network.
The secretariat is made up of WHO and
UNICEF with, the University of North
Carolina, the Water Institute at the
University of North Carolina playing the communications role.
Within the secretariat, we have an advisory group.
Which is pulled from the various members of the high ranking proven practitioners and researchers.
The catch here is that if you are with a
UN organization, you are excluded from being on, on, on the advisory group.
Then we have a public private partnership group.
This group also works hand in hand with the advisory group and the secretariat because the network prove, is trying to provide a level platform for their private sector to really invest into what move on the HWTS.
We have the participating organizations and members around the Secretariat then, in the strategy we had working groups but then it didn't really work well.
So, in terms of implementation the
WHO and UNICEF both designated focal points as co-hosts, and the membership of the
Advisory group were selected based on an agreed criteria.
And the Secretariat organize and convene network and annual, and the Advisory group meetings.
Again we develop and implement the communication plan.
UNC performs the communication function for the network.
Now, within the network, here are the responsibilities.
There are four core areas.
WHO take care of two, knowledge advancement and policy and advocacy.
In terms of knowledge advancement, WHO look at research, knowledge management, technology assessment.
For the policy and advocacy, they look at the global and national level poli advocacy, and the policy formulation and review of strategic document.
UNICEF leads on the capacity development, training workshop, dissemination of best practices, et cetera.
And also take care of monitoring, where we talk about the global process, progress, on HWTS, and then the mapping at, of implementation at the country level.
UNC maintains regular and constant communication within the secretariat and outside the secretariat.
Out, here are some of the key achievements but not all.
We've hosted over a dozen, over half a dozen regional workshops leading to the formation of over 20 national HWTS action plans.
A tool kit of harmonized indicators to strengthen monitoring and implementation of HWTS has also been developed.
And awareness have been raised on integration.
The need for integration among key public health efforts.
Such as HV, HIV AIDS, maternal and child health, nutrition, et cetera.
And we rarely emphasize on the role of
HWTS.
Out of these abrife notes that we can lay hands on.
Again, we are supporting a quality assurance of HWTS products through the HWTS evaluations scheme.
Then there is a global capacity building through strategic webinars.
What worked and what is or what is working?
The co-hosting arrangement actually harnessed the strength of both UNICEF and WHO.
The original workshops has really been great.
It's focus is controlled and it's really I mean selected based on the countries and this one really have very strong output.
Integration is also great.
It has worked very well with other environmental health such as the indoor air pollution et cetera.
We are however have a bit of challenges.
The first is the working groups.
It started well but then it died off.
I can li, link it like a community of practice.
So what we intend doing is now when an issue is hot, then you will form a community of practice to deal with that issue.
Again, the network has a very ambitious target.
And as we go down implementation during the review, we will look at what needs to be done.
There need to be a clear alignment and harmonization between water safety plans and HWTS.
There's been a bit of confusion whether
HWTS is under the water safety plans or not, but we realize that HWTS is unique on it's own, but at the same time, it's also one of the vital or the vital actions that will help water safety plans at the community level.
The advisory group was also working great but however we are faced with challenges of membership.
Here on this slide, we have the information, the network home page is hosted by WHO and the other one hosted by UNC.
Then, if you want to subscribe to the newsletter, you can contact Ryan, the communication at the email below.
And Ryan will comfortably and add you to the network and you will receive all the information that is needed.
Thank you very much for participation.
Again, I'm Michael Forson, the co-host to the network.
Thank you.
[SOUND]
