Welcome back to Nature, In code, we're in chapter 4, lecture 7.
This is the last lecture of this chapter and in this lecture,
We will modify our existing
Javascript code and what we're interested in, in this lecture is if a single neutral mutant allele goes to fixation in the rare event that where this happens.
How long does this take on average?
So here's our code.
We just modified this value previously but I'm gonna set this back to one over two times N because I-- oops.
I want to make sure that the frequency is correct from the beginning,
In that we have one single a1 allele, and now we're interested in keeping track of the generations.
And then in particular we're interested in seeing how many generations it takes in those simulations where P does indeed go up to one at the a1 allele goes to fixation.
So what we need to do is we need to keep track of the number of generation, so I'm going to set up a local variable here
I'm gonna call generations and I'm gonna initialise this at zero and then here every time I call this next generation function.
I'm gonna increase this--this value by one so generations equals generations plus one.
So this is essentially a counter now, so in each simulation run.
I'm keeping track of the generations, but what I'm really interested in though is really only those times and those generations when P does indeed go to one, when the a1 allele goes to fixation.
So even though I'm--I'm keeping track of this all the time
I ultimately only want to keep track of the successful simulation runs.
So what I'm gonna do to keep track of those is
I'm going to define a global variable where I'm simply going to add up all the generations in those runs where everyone went to fixation.
So I'm going to go up here and I'm gonna set up a variable then I'm gonna call total generations and say total generations.
I'm going to initialise this at zero and so now I can say here, down here, down here.
I know 2 things I know KP has indeed reached one so the a1 allele has gone to fixation and I also know now how many generations that took this particular simulation run because I kept track of it with this generations variable.
So all I need to do now is basically add this to the total-- total generations variables.
I'm gonna say total generations equals, well, what we already have in total generations at the moment, plus generations, plus the number of generations, it just took for this simulation to reach P equals one and so now at the end of all of this down here.
This variable total generations will be the sum of all generations that was spent in only those simulations where P that indeed reach one.
So how can we now get the average?
Well that's quite simple.
So we simply now take this variable, total generations, which has all the generations in a successful fixation runs and then we need simply to divide by the number of successful fixation runs and how many are those?
Well, we remember we kept track of this with this valuable here, fixation of mutant, that's-- that's the the variable that acts as a calendar for the number of simulation runs, where--where the A1 allele did indeed go to fixation.
So we simply have to divide by this number.
And now, we should get the average number of generations it takes for a fixation for the a1 allele to go to fixation.
So let's save this and go over to the browser.
So here we have our file open, we can still see you know, we-- we started, we left off with the P equals 0.2.
And so this was the frequency, the probability that the a1 allele did go to fixation but we set this back to one over two N and now I'm going to reload this and what I see here is that the average of generations, it takes for the a1 allele to go to fixation seems to be something like, you know, close to 400, okay let me reload this.
Yes, same thing.
Yeah, it seems to be hovering around 400, quite a bit of variation of course because as you now know, most of the simulations do actually not go to fixation and we only keep track of those that-- that go to fixation.
So you know what, let's go back to the code and let's increase the number of simulations by something like a factor 10 so I'm going to up this here from 10,000 to 100,000, it seems to be fairly fast, so I should be able to still do this.
So let me reload it here.
Now this is gonna take a little longer, but the result is you know the same, we're still around 400, we seem to have a little less variation now around this number but there still seems to be you know, roughly true and this is now taking some time, and this may take of course more or less time on your computer.
But while this is loading
I want to let you know that indeed the correct-- the mathematically expected and correct number would be 4N so that is the expected result, and that's exactly what we observe here, we have a population of 100 individuals and we can see that a successful fixation from a single copy of an allele usually takes around
400 generations.
So this seems to work, well done and this is now the end of this chapter.
So we've seen that the effect of genetic of mutation is to increase genetic variation we got a little bit of a mathematical handle on this.
And now we have here a simulation in place, where we can keep track of the fate of a single allele and we observed 2 important things using this code here.
The first was that the probability of a fixation of a neutral allele is its frequency that was the first important observation and now we've confirmed that if an illegal indeed does go to fixation from a single copy, starting from a single copy, the expect the time is 4N, so this concludes this lecture and this chapter.
Well done, you've reached the end of Chapter 4,
I hope you now understand the process of mutation a little bit better.
Mutation is an incredibly important force.
It is ultimately the main generator of genetic variation and therefore the main generator of all the diversity we see in this world and that's quite a stunning observation on its own.
Now in the next chapter, we are going to expand our world even more and we're going to implement spacial models.
And this is gonna be a fun chapter because going to be very visual and experience has shown that many learners find this to be one of the, of the most rewarding chapter.
So,
I'll see you there.
