From Session One we have proposed to you a rapid journey across theories and languages of space, and spatiality.
Two major issues: the World and the individual.
Two essential processes: urbanity and telecommunication and two major topics: nature and time.
At the end of this itinerary, the question we'd like to pose is:
How do spaces as environments and spatialities, as sets of actions, interact and combine?
More specifically, how can human agency modify spaces that prefigure agency, but however, are clearly exposed to it?
The examples of war, Europe, and urbanism will help us to comprehend two critical notions: spatial justice and inhabiting.
In this session, we will go back to the questions addressed during the previous eight sessions.
We will explore the same realities and tackle the same issues, but with a particular angle, that of agency.
The starting point is that geographicity is submitted to actors’ moves.
These actors being individual, collective or organizational components of a society, or the society as a whole.
We will begin with a global scale and continue to downscale, by next, focusing on a continent, Europe, and finally the city.
As a conclusion of this course, we will introduce two transversal issues: spatial justice and inhabiting.
One of the major reasons why human agency has become more possible, is that the huge constraints that weighed on individual and collective leeway, have been progressively eased.
Spatial freedoms have correlatively increased.
The issue of war and peace is a good case for us to analyze this change.
Let's take an example to make this hypothesis slightly more intelligible.
What can we say about wars?
On this controversial topic, several theories can be considered.
Some simply contend that war is not a historical object and consider war is in man, as an expression of man's natural propensity to violence.
For others, geopolitical logics have always existed and will do forever.
However, we know today that pre-paleolithic wars were short-friction, violent episodes, whose nature changed when the control of surpluses became a major issue.
About 5,000 years ago, within the neolithic era, the birth of the geopolitical state, endowed with a permanent army and fortified places, is a logical defensive, as well as an offensive response to the fragility of the emerging productive systems.
What is called geopolitical wars, interstate wars or classical wars, begins then and continues for centuries, until the paroxysm of WWII.
Now, some converging observations show the decline of classical geopolitical wars, namely because the most developed countries do not make war to each other anymore.
Most current wars are intrastate, that is to say they are conflicts that occur inside a particular state, such as civil wars, like Syria, since 2011.
Secession wars like South Sudan, between 1983 to 2005, or inter-communal wars
(many conflicts in Sub-Saharan Africa).
This is what the surveys of the ‘Human Security Report’ show.
Regarding state based wars, there are fewer wars and less casualties on the battle fields.
Moreover, wars are increasingly intrastate conflicts, which make them go beyond classical geopolitical wars.
Today, the most developed countries don't always have friendly relationships with each other, but they endeavour not to make war to each other, because they have painfully learned that the cost of wars and management of empires, which can be imaginable in economies of stock, has lost its sense in economies of flows.
Conquering territories by force, generates the risk of elimination from the international scene, with few advantages.
It is this unhappy end that Europe experienced in 1945, after centuries of bloody wars.
Even when pursuing the traditional goal of gaining more influence, a state is more efficient in ‘soft’, than ‘hard’ power, as Joseph Nye wrote.
Geopolitics is setting back as this fear of politics is enlarging.
Hybrid situations appear.
This table shows the possible intersections between two rationales; that of intersociety relationships; realism versus idealism, and that of intrasocietal political stances
(conservatism versus progressivism).
The upper left and the bottom right boxes are easy to put into perspective.
We can understand that a certain kind of conservatism refuses the trend toward the universalizing of values and, as a result, believes that we'll live more comfortably in a segmented World.
Contrarily, it is consistent with the idea of self perfectibility of society that, sooner or later, the World will become a new, fully-fledged tier of citizenship with a democratic government and a rule-of-the-law justice.
Immanuel Kant versus Carl Schmitt: this is a fair, bright fight.
More mysterious, and yet, present on the scene, are the two other boxes.
We recently had the opportunity to observe the historical experiment of idealistic conservatism epitomized by the neoconservatives under the George W. Bush administration.
In Europe, a significant part of the parties belonging to the traditional left, support the ideology of realistic progressivism, characterized by a rejection of any intervention based on human rights, aiming at a state.
In the American case, the post 9/11 defensive nationalism, is a resource for aggressive interventions all over the World.
In the European case, the tetanized clutching to the welfare state, protecting against any change, hampers the emergence of a post-national vision of World affairs.
Anti-Americanism, although it is wrapped up in an anti-imperialistic ethical speech, often resembles a nostalgic revival of inter-imperial rivalries, especially in France.
In both situations, the state functions like a screen, which hinders the capacity of addressing the issues at stake at a global scale.
For example, unilateralism and multilateralism take place under the same geopolitical and antipolitical paradigm.
In a political society there is pluralism in opinion, but only one scene, one parliament, or one government.
Moreover, in a federal political society, a government accepts the existence of other governments, on upper or lower tiers.
This table can help us understand that the invention of politics is a major, non-trivial issue that global civil society has on its control panel, with states being alternatively friends and foes of this perspective.
A war-less World, is a World where social construction loses its tragic character and becomes pragmatic, that is, a complex resultant of actors' intentionalities.
