From the very beginning of this course, we have seen how important the ‘spatial me’ is, and, more generally, spatial agency, or spatiality, is as a power in contemporary societies.
We have equally observed how space can be a powerful and shaping environment and how it can be seen as a public good.
Inhabiting can be identified as a meeting point between spatiality and space.
Let's explain. Even when they seem immobile, the constitutive elements of a society function as a dynamic configuration, at least in reproducing what which already exists, but more often as a process of change.
And space is not an exception.
It is composed of actions-- those of the actors themselves, which actors have injected into objects that become active, and, finally, those which have ended up by crafting environments, that is to say establishing frameworks for action, which may be modifiable by new actions.
The relation between spatiality and space opens up the possibility for multiple actions and futures, shaped by the history of relationships between societies and their parts - individuals, collectives, organizations, institutions –, the emergence of the individual actor being a major historical bifurcation.
The distinction between ‘Gemeinschaft’ and ‘Gesellschaft’ has been largely documented by social sciences, since it was first outlined by Ferdinand Tönnies in 1887.
Max Weber, Émile Durkheim, Norbert Elias, and many contemporary scholars, converge in describing the contemporary social world in developed countries as a society of individuals.
This implies that old communal allegiances, based on biological, religious, economic or national principles, are challenged by other forms of social organization, in which traditional structures may not have vanished, but enable a direct dialog between individuals and society as a whole.
This is made possible by new social apparatuses: a powerful welfare state, which provides to everyone minimal ‘primary goods’, a rule of the law state, that transcends communal rules, and forms of democratic governance, which, at the least, prevent the exclusion of ordinary citizens from public deliberation.
A society of individuals is therefore by no means less societal than the former communal society.
On the contrary, it is characterized by both more individuality and more society.
In any case, it is clear enough that a society of individuals gives a new consistency to a specific relationship between actors and spatial environments.
Finally, spatialities and spaces generated by the humans do not possess by themselves any tragic characteristic.
Their destiny is not predetermined and the Earth does not call out.
As a literary genre, space emerges rather as a ‘drama’: a tension which results from the capacity of each individual to affect the space of all the others, as well as their own, and this constitutes a remarkably dramatic lever.
However, the play is written at the same time as it is being acted out.
This is another confirmation that spatialities as actors’ agency, and space as societal environment, are not dissociable.
In Session 2 we analyzed the limits of Heidigger's conception of inhabiting, a conception that privileges rootedness, nearness, and fixity, and proposed another approach to inhabiting that encompasses mobility, otherness, and historicity.
Once reconciled with history, the notion of inhabiting can become both a fully spatial, and fully social concept.
It offers a useful abstract of an interactive, but balanced, relation, that spatialities and spaces, geographical actors and geographical environments can entertain.
But, the very interest of this concept lies in the fragility of its pragmatic implementation.
Building a single house in a natural landscape has the effect of modifying this landscape in a significant manner.
Geographicity presents at once an individual (spatiality) and a societal (space) characters.
This creates a very sensitive tension, and sometimes a very visible one.
Space is that environment which, in a more explicit way than others, inhabits us at the same time as we inhabit it.
This is probably why the geographical approach of social worlds has a special power to make visible simultaneously, what, separately or together, humans hold, and of what holds humans together.
Said differently, how can I make the world inhabitable without making it uninhabitable for others, and for me, among them?
That is the fundamental question citizens ask the social scientists of space.
Thus, space seems to be a particularly vulnerable environment par excellence.
Since modifications made by a small number of actors can have consequences on all of the other actors, it appears also as a par-excellence expression of the possible co-operative dimension of social life.
Inhabiting is what happens when environments enhance the actors’ spatial freedoms and when actors develop the environment's capability to make a living-together possible and worthwhile.
This course is now ending.
Let's sum it up in one statement.
Spaces are made up by spatial agency and spatial agency is about spatial actors, that is to say, everybody, each of us.
Hence, the last question
I would like to ask you: what spatial actor would you like to be?
