At the urban scale, spatial agency is a major issue too.
Action on the city has long been described by the term ‘urban planning’.
At the beginning, experts, mainly architects and engineers, were commissioned by the public authority to conceive, design and build material infrastructures and buildings that would shape the future urban spaces and condition their inhabitants’ lives.
But this is changing now, and the term ‘urbanism’, that was used to mean ‘urban way of life’ in 20th century English, has turned to be a synonym of the reinvention of urban planning.
The table shows the shifts that have taken place from traditional urban planning to the emerging urbanism.
As we can see, the experts are becoming actors among other actors, and the empowerment of ordinary citizens is fundamental.
Although their opinion is not properly taken seriously, they have conquered powerful means to hinder or cancel projects:
Law suits, single-issue street or media activism, direct democracy or even individual moving from a house to another.
Switching from urban design to urban becoming is all the more important that simultaneously the process of urbanization as we've seen in Session 5 has shifted from absolute to relative.
With the end of the absolute urbanization, the issue at stake will less and less be the making of containers for urbanized, fixed or mobile life, but more and more the shaping of urban life itself.
In a society of urban individuals, the inhabitants’ choices become the major strategic parameter of urban dynamics.
These choices are subject to change but much easily in a dense, and open participatory process in which experts and politicians turn out to be actors amongst other actors.
Much has been done in theoretical research, namely by authors such as John Rawls, or Amartya Sen, to explore the concept of justice as a crucial issue in contemporary societies.
Now the attention of the adjective ‘spatial’ to a supposed-to-be-non-spatial justice, raises a number of epistemological and theoretical problems that geographers are just beginning to tackle.
The risk here is to oversimplify the answer to one or more of these questions.
Who defines what is just and how?
To what extent could space be something else than a neutral container of unjust or just items?
Could geographers’ work bring a specific contribution to the public debate on justice?
The example of debates about gentrification shows that this ‘programme’ for spatial justice is highly controversial.
In the Anglophone geographical literature, scholars such as David Ley, Chris Hamnett or Richard Florida, can be opposed to David Harvey, Neil Smith or Edward Soja.
The key issue is, first of all, vocabulary.
Gentrification is commonly used as a virtual synonym of the French ‘embourgeoisement’.
Should we name the middle class individuals that move to poorer neighborhoods, ‘gentrifiers’ or, instead, ‘ghetto-killers’, or ‘mix-makers’?
Although it has rapidly been used in a derogatory way, the term ‘bobo’ coined by David Brooks in 2000 is more relevant than ‘gentrifier’ precisely because ‘bourgeois-boheme’ people have the choice to dwell in different kinds of real-estate-price locations, and it's easy to prove that if this group did not exist, a geography solely made of land-value-generated, homogenous districts would spontaneously emerge.
This is exactly what happened between the 1950s and 1980s in most North American cities when the ‘urban flight’ involved the huge majority of the middle class.
We can see the difference with Europe during this period.
In Western European cities, people with high cultural capital remained in the cities historical centres even when their incomes were low.
They arbitrated in favor of smaller or less comfortable flats, while the social atmosphere was favorable to various kinds of de-densifying urbanization processes.
The word ‘gentrification’ embeds the idea that deprived persons or already segregated groups should be left in a homogeneous environment and that this would be a better situation than social mix, which is praised in general but denied in practice as either impossible or dangerous by many authors.
In short, it is not because gentrification is a danger for social mix that it should be condemned, they say, but right on the contrary because it enlarges districts’ sociological spectrum, and weakens ghettos.
If we connect the history of debates on urban topics to the history of urban realities, we are inevitably struck by their growing diverging course.
On the one hand, after decades of urban flight and its consequences, pervasive violence in the streets, the emergence of urban renaissance does not appear as a pretentious model but as an effective bifurcation.
It suddenly makes sense that David Ley explicitly used the ‘Vancouver Experience’ of urban regeneration as a primary study case to develop his critical statements on gentrification.
In this city, the urban re-encounter with urbanity began in the late 1970s and the Expo 86 represents a first milestone in the process of urban regeneration.
All the intellectual construction of contemporary urbanism,
I mean urban agency here in the European meaning, is underpinned by the idea that through public space sociological and functional diversity is at stake as an issue and a goal in every single action, at any scale of the city.
On the other hand, the neo-structuralist approach rejects the very idea of social mix as the revenge of the bourgeoisie over the proletariat, and understands the right to public space as a synonym of a right to the ghetto.
Between both sides, discussion is not easy.
These oppositions are part of a larger paradigm divergence and are not a problem in itself.
Pluralism in debates should be the correct response to plurality of ideas.
Trouble begins when the hegemony of one approach practically discards all others.
There is clearly a problem here in Anglophone literature.
One single point of view appears overwhelming and omnipresent while the others are censored, or self-censored.
