Protected areas preserve values.
These values can be animal and plant species as well as ecosystems.
These are the values that need to be maintained in a sustainable way.
It is, therefore, important to be able to measure the current state and the evolution of these values, as well as to detect the threats they are facing.
In Burundi, for instance, an invasive plant species, the Lantana has taken over the Rusizi National Park, completely.
To avoid this situation, the problem should have been identified upon finding the plant in the park, but it is now probably too late.
The park has lost an important part of it's ecological value now.
Ecological monitoring is a key step in adaptive management, but it is not the only tool that can get information from the field.
Indeed.
Other means such as anti-poaching surveillance, research, and tourism can also provide a lot of information, actually.
Okay. This is agreed, but ecological monitoring remains the main source to guide decisions, and actions, for site management.
Yeah, sure.
In the early 2000s, when the population of Black Rhinoceros in the North Cameroon disappeared, strict ecological monitoring, like collecting droppings for instance, would have allowed us to identify the imminent threat of these extinction, or at least to stop the useless surveillance once the species disappeared.
We know that a protected area is a special kind of territory with several characteristics: it is defined, recognized, dedicated, and so on, and it is managed for the conservation of nature.
Keep in mind, as this is its primary goal, as we explained in the MOOC on Protected Area Management in the 4th sequence of the 1st module.
Ecological monitoring can be applied to many territories and species outside of protected areas as well.
For example, swallow populations are being monitored in Europe in order to measure the impact of pesticides.
In the case of a protected area, ecological monitoring intends to show that the goal of the protected area its conservation, is being achieved.
So monitoring is, hence, intentional and targeted.
Indeed, and this is especially interesting to have ecological monitoring in a protected area since it is, let's say usually, a significant ecosystem on the national or regional level.
It contains complete, or at least sufficiently representative, ecological processes for successful research.
Since the protected area is being managed, it offers a good working base, with means and infrastructures, and, sometimes, available and qualified staff.
A protected area allows for long term monitoring, and can provide historic data, which increases knowledge.
It is a good place to experiment, and it allows for  a wide distribution of information, to other protected areas of the same category, for instance.
It can also be a good medium for sharing results with different targets, in schools or  universities, but also with the general public.
Therefore, protected areas play an important part in raising awareness for conservation.
As we saw in the MOOC on Protected
Area Management, the management of protected areas is organized according to a management plan, defined in a participatory way with clear goals concrete activities, and assigned responsibilities.
Ecological monitoring has to be integrated to the preparation of this plan to ensure it will give relevant indicators, but also that it will be effectively implemented.
It is useless to plan actions that cannot be assessed or to associate them with indicators that cannot be measured.
Ecological monitoring must be discussed, shared, and understood by everybody involved in its implementation, and the park's manager needs to take ownership of the plan from the very start.
Ecological monitoring is obviously part of the protected area management, but it is also one of the tools used to measure the effectiveness of said management.
As we saw in the MOOC on the Protected
Area Management, monitoring needs to be subject to protocols as well as to reliable methods to be implemented.
It is important to note that it is one of the rare possible sources of information regarding the impact of our management actions, or decisions.
For example, by showing the evolution of the environment over time, according to what we do, or what we did,
Therefore, regular monitoring of the state of plants can show that repetitive bush fires in grasslands lead to the disappearance of some useful grass species.
This finding will allow to choose a better adapted season and a better periodicity for the ignition of those fires.
Ecological monitoring accounts for the state of the protected area and identifies the pressures and threats it is facing.
It is important to base this ecological monitoring on matters that will allow making the best decisions in controlling those risks.
Since means will necessarily be limited, monitoring needs to be prioritized.
This is very important.
This should not compete with more urgent actions in the protected area.
This reinforces the necessity for good coordination with all those involved in the management, in and around the protected area, from the implementation of the monitoring protocol onwards.
To make it simple, a useless ecological monitoring program is worse than none at all.
Ecological monitoring is also and important tool in training and motivating staff.
It empowers rangers, eco-guides, volunteers, and includes them in the management process in whole, not as mere implementers, but as the providers of information that is at the very heart of the decision-making process.
By giving access to new tools, such as cyber-trackers, GPS, or camera, like here on the screen, ecological monitoring broadens agents' skills, and since they are in touch with researchers, their personal knowledge is being developed.
Monitoring is also a powerful tool for collecting funds for a protected area.
By providing reliable and transparent information regarding the state of the conservation and the progress that has been made, it makes is possible to justify the use of the funds that they have received.
Yes, in a documented way for once.
By proposing new targets or activities, it justifies access to additional funding.
It serves as a tool for accountability.
We know that. We understand that.
But also for prospection.
Ecological monitoring is also a vector for internal organization.
It strengthens the collaboration between different departments of the protected area, like the admin, the research, the surveillance, communication, training departments, and so on, because it is multidisciplinary and needs everybody's input to be successful.
For example, storing collected data is key to monitoring sustainability.
To process this information within the protected area, and store all the data, the entire organization is engaged.
Beyond the management aspects, ecological monitoring, of course, has its own distinctive role, which is to inform on species and ecosystems.
Now, we know that.
You get to know what species inhabit a protected area, in what numbers, during which seasons, at what places, and so on.
On this basis, ecological monitoring with measure the variations in space and time, short, medium, long term.
You can then understand the interactions, measure the impacts of the pressures, and better estimate samples to be taken.
For example, monitoring elephant populations within the Kruger National Park, and monitoring their impacts on plants, has allowed determining the threshold at which said population needs to be maintained at in order to prevent damages on the ecosystem that will also be detrimental to other species.
The next step is to figure out how to do it, but that's another story.
Ecological monitoring is crucial in the PA management process.
It is quite surprising to find that many parks don't have a monitoring protocol in place at all.
Others have one, but it doesn't give any information on the state of the values or it is based on outdated techniques, or the produced results are not understood or shared or used.
And this is not the case in a minority of sites, unfortunately. it's the situation of a vast majority of protected areas, where management has turned into a plain and systematic repetition of actions with no effort put into assisting the impacts, actually.
Sadly.
So sad.
