We have already seen what attributes offer a given value to manage of, and how to do so.
But, all the aspects still need to be clarified.
Yes, for example, do we need to assess the entire population of the monitored species, or rather it's entire habitat, or will assessing only a part of it be enough?
How many assessments need to be made to get a result accurate enough for good management decision making?
When, how often and where do these assessments of the chosen ecological attribute needs to be made?
Well, this is precisely
the sampling plan that will allow us to answer these practical questions.
Sampling is particularly useful, when a monitored value covers a large area. 
Indeed monitoring everything will not only be expensive but also unsuitable because it gives way to bias that will skew the final results.
Particularly if the monitor species is mobile or if the targeted eco-systems spread over
 too many inaccessible areas.
The total count of the vast
protected area of a very mobile species creates a high risk of unknowingly counting the same animal several times leading to false results.
There are cases, however, in which sampling is not required.
For instance, when a considered values spread over a small surface which can be entirely covered proceeding to counting the values, entire population would be in that case very easy.
So same to sampling, you only need to asses a portion of the value. 
And then to extrapolate the result to the entire population.
Like, to the surface area of the forest for instance or to the entire population of the animal specie and this portion of the value that is being assessed is what is call the sample.
That is it.
Now, what steps need to be followed to draw a sampling plan?
First, you need to decide where in the particular area you need to collect this information
In other words, what will be the sample size?
Be careful, in order to get an adequate picture, it is essential for the sampling size to reflect the entire value.
This is what we call the representativeness of the sample against the species' global population
 within a particular area.
To guarantee this, its better to proceed to random sampling.
This way you are making sure each sample unit of the population has an equal chance of being selected.
And since we are looking to asses specific parameters of a species in a given habitat, it may be relevant to proceed to a random, stratified, or clustered sampling. 
There are indeed quite offensive substantial variations within the protected area for the ecological attribute that is being assessed, and this can be caused by environmental guidance or by difference in management between different areas of the protected area. 
In this type of situation, it can be useful to divide a site into sub-units let's say, or strata, that refer to different characteristics of the considered ecological attributes. 
Like the different densities of a single species according to it's location for instance. 
This way, you can sample each stratum separately. 
Estimation-based strata are then combined to give an estimation of the whole protected area for this attributes. 
Stratified sampling is therefore, generally used to make estimations more accurate.
The second step of designing the sampling plan consists in choosing the size and the  number of samples to collect.
The step is very important. 
It essentially depends on the degree of precision and at which we want to assess the considered attribute. 
Because the more precision you want, the more samples you will need to collect, but obviously, the more there is to sample, the more expensive it will be. 
The third step consist in deciding on the sample collection calendar in the identified sampling area,
At what time of the year, and of day, will they take place?
And also, how often?
These choices, essentially depend on the biological cycles of the monitored values. 
For instance, it's best to choose the time of year or day when animals are more active to be sure the observers will be able to spot them. 
Yes, monitoring populations of winter migratory bird population should be done in the middle of the winter when the expected population of birds have arrived and are not ready to leave yet. 
Like these bee eaters for instance. 
Plants are better monitored after flouring period. 
Otherwise, you risk counting only the foreign plants and forget to detect the stems that don't floral discharge. 
Deciding on the frequency of assessments, depends essentially on the speed at which changes occur within the considered attribute. 
For instance, endangered animal species can decline rapidly due to bad management. and you will then need to increase the frequency of assessment of relevant indicators. 
Like we see with this black rhino for instance.
Hopefully, this will allow to react on time if it's not too late. 
