For each value of the protected area, ecological monitoring protocols are drawn up and together they form the global monitoring program of the territory.
The only thing left to do is to implement them. 
The staff in charge will collect, store and analyze the data throughout the year following this established scheduled. 
You need to make sure though that the psychological monitoring remains consistent overtime, meaning that the collected data will be comparable from one collection campaign to another over several years. 
This quality control is facilitated by the creation of a clear technical manual that guarantees the compatibility of data and the repeat-ability of the used approaches overtime. 
This technical manual should describe in detail all the protocols.
In other words, it tracks the data from when they are collected up to the analysis. 
It guides the ecological monitoring.
Thus, any kind of variation from this manual, be it connected to observers or to the method used, is to be recorded overtime in this manual and then incorporated to the results of statistic test. 
The manual should first describe how the data will be recorded in the field. 
There are several option available on the paper form, through a recording tool as symbol through that we can see it there, or a smart phone application. 
The choice depends on the quality of information together, on the means at hand, and what would be the most practical tool for staff in the field. 
This is why it is very important for the users to test the chosen tool first. 
For instance in conservancy around Maasai Mara in Kenya, several connection tool have been tested; phone like a smartphone app as well as a smart tool and the rangers after having tested all these tools have finally chosen the smart phone app as being the easiest one to use in the field to collect and store all the data. 
Then the manual should state how the data needs to be stored. 
There are two important criteria to consider here.
The first, you need an easy to use database that allow to easily extract the data to analyze. 
Microsoft Access for instance is a good example of a simple database that enables the heavy handling of data for different types of analysis. 
And then excel sheets are even easier to use and offer better options to process the digital data and they are also easy to transport to statistical software or GIA software for special data. 
I know the key element is that, the data, need to persist over several years. 
It is therefore crucial to do backups on the next day on our drive for instance, and to secure the database to avoid losing the information.
And a good solution for this is to appoint one person responsible for the database to make sure it is updated and that everything works, and the other users will be able to access the database of course, but only to conceal the data and not to edit it. 
Obviously, creating and maintaining a database is not an earning itself, we have the data but who will analyze them and when?
To often the data piles up and nobody uses it, so the manual also need to say who will do what and when. 
Let's remember that analyzing the data for ecological monitoring needs to enable comparing the data of a sample at a predefined thresholds like the threshold of viability of a species for instance. 
Also to compare the data of a collected sample at different point in time, to see if there are any notable variation over time in this same sample. 
The analysis usually implies using hypothesis test and confidence intervals which are detailed in this module in the session on statistics.
Hypothesis test will allow for instance to show that they're may or may not have been some sort of variation in partly the entire population. 
However, this information is often of limited interest because we know that there will be variations due to the dynamic nature of the animal population and habitats.
What is more interesting is finding out how important this variation is, and if it is, let's say, ecologically significant.
This is where confidence intervals are useful to describe the normal or abnormal variation range. 
Let's keep in mind that the use of inadequate statistic test or neglecting some biases in the analysis can lead to serious mistakes and interpretation. 
The person in-charge of analyzing the data  should therefore have good knowledge on statistics.
He needs, he or she, needs to be around to measure the possible biases particularly well. 
Finally, once the data has been described and analyzed, the results have to be interpreted and presented clearly. 
Strangely enough, this step is often the longest and the most complicated. 
Because, let's not forget that the results need to meet the objectives for which the monitoring has been set up. 
Namely, informing the decision makers on the state of the protected area's values. 
Thus, the quality of ecological monitoring is also measured by it's capacity to be understood by the decision makers and thereby, to guide the management of the protected area to changing the management practices where it's needed. 
An interesting example are the maps from the geographic information system that easily convey the evolution and the distribution of certain species present in the protected area overtime, allowing thereby, pragmatic decision making. 
And we can see on this one, the distribution of some wild life in a park in Cameroon, of the Cameroon. 
