In this module, we've seen what ecological monitoring a protected area means and that it intends to asses the state of the territory's values. 
These values are characterized by ecological attributes which are described by indicators. 
Ecological monitoring follows a protocol that specifies assembly plan and approach to use. 
So, let's summarize the steps to follow to implement ecological monitoring. 
First off, you need to identify the values to monitor, the ones that matter to the management  of the protected area
and that could be part of a sensible ecological monitoring plan.
It can be an animal species or an ecosystem within the protected area, for instance.
You then determine the key ecological attributes. 
The one that will characterize the value and help understand the state of the protected area, the density of the species that is being monitored for instance or it's population dynamics or even original floral composition of the chosen ecosystem. 
It is generally useful to specify some indicators easily measurable to express these ecological attributes. 
In other words, the number of individuals of the targeted species, the age distribution, or even the presence or absence of invasive species within the ecosystem. 
The next step consist of identifying the acceptable limits within which the ecological attributes may vary. 
The limit between a healthy attribute and one that requires intervention.
An example is to set the minimal number of individuals that indicates the endangerment of the species or on the other hand, a maximum number that implies an excessive number of individuals that puts the ecosystem at risk. 
Then come the choice in method to measure these indicators which would of course take into account the monetary values but also the capabilities of the protected area itself in terms of means and skills.
You can either choose to directly count the animals or indirectly by monitoring tracks for example, these decisions should be based on the context in which you work and the results you hope to obtain. 
Well, the approach as in, you need to draw up the sampling plan that will ensure obtained results will be as usable, precise, and correct as possible. 
You can then proceed to counting all the individuals
near water point if the species is localized or on the other hand, assembling 
10% or 20% of the park if the species is spread out equally. 
For instance, monitoring invasive plant species is done by counting the new stems in random transects. 
And then collect the data according to the chosen method and sampling plan. 
What maters in this step is to follow drawer pools and to do the work with precision. 
If you don't, you give way to an acceptable bias for the data processing.
And the data collected should be stored and remain available for future use because they guarantee the truthfulness and the reliability of the monitoring. 
They especially ensure that another user will obtain the same result later on with the same data. 
Exactly, and this data will then be analyzed and the obtained result will be transformed into information. 
Thereby, the animal account is rendered into a density in the park, which can then be compared to a non-standard for this kind of ecosystem and the species. 
At this point, and according to the  determined monitoring goals, you should get an idea of the
 monitoring values condition now.
For instance, the questions around invasive plant species, we started a discussion, should now be answered; what species are present, how many, where, offers do they present, et cetera. 
And depending these health condition and the predefined limits for the attributes we have defined before, the decision will be made and actions put into place to maintain protected area in a good condition or on the other hand, restore an attribute that may have been damaged.
If animals become too scarce, we would, for example, need to change the strategy and the fights against poaching, if we have one.
If the environment is invaded by an invasive plant species, you change the rate of fire ignition or you proceed to manual extraction. 
And all these needs to be repeated as often as needed, to feed the decision making process of adoptive management, because the monitoring is in fact just the part of a larger cycle that it tends to manage the territory in the best way as possible. 
