Hello and welcome to this second module of the second chapter of fluid mechanics.
Second chapter that is dedicated to the phenomena of surface tension and capillarity.
In this second module, we will introduce a fundamental law, phenomena of capillarity that we call Laplace's law.
Before making a formal derivation, we will firstly use a method extremely powerful that will be detailed widely during the chapter 3, a method extremely powerful that is called the method of dimensional analysis. The question to which we want to answer is to know how is linked the pressure difference
(P2-P1) at the boundaries of a droplet or of a bubble. I am calling "droplet" liquid drops in a liquid and I am probably saying with a slight abuse of notation "bubble" a drop of gas in a liquid. Let's call, for the moment this drop and this drop of fluid
2 in a fluid 1 at a pressure difference at its borders P2 - P1 and I would like to know how it depends on the parameters of the problem, namely the radius of the bubble or the drop, but also the coefficient of surface tension of which I suspect that this has a certain importance. I know that it is much more difficult to do very big droplets in certain fluids than in others. I will thus simply proceed in the following manner, I will express the pressure difference: P2 - P1 in its fundamentals units, i.e. Newtons per meter^2. I express the surface tension in these fundamental units
: Newtons per meter. I express the radius, in its fundamental unit, the meter. Now,
I am looking for exponents for each of these important parameters, the surface tension at the power α, the radius at the power
β such to obtain that γ power α multiplied by the radius to the power β gives me the units of pressure i.e.
N/m^2. It is not complicated to be convinced that by choosing to divide the surface tension which is in N/m by the radius which is in m, I obtain N/m^2. Hence,
α = 1, β = -1  and I obtain a link of proportionality between the pressure difference P2 - P1 which is proportional to γ/R. Now, the main question, is the value and above all the sign of the proportionality constant.
Indeed, it is natural to think that this sign is positive. Why ? Because due to the inflated shape of the bubble, it is natural to think that P2 > P1, this is not certain yet. It is fundamental to know if the pre-factor is equal to 1, 2 10 or
10 000. Hence, in order to answer these two very important questions : what is the sign of the proportionality coefficient but also what is it value, we will make the following reasoning in energy.
In order to determine this proportionality coefficient, i.e. both its sign and its numerical value, we will make a reasoning in energy. This is a thought experiment by making an infinitesimal perturbation, it is a method extremely common in physics and in fluid mechanics.
We will consider that our droplet of fluid 2 in a fluid 1 of pressure difference P2 - P1 goes from a radius R to a radius R + dR with dR infinitesimally small
(i.e. it is very small). We will express firstly the surface energy as a function of the surface. We know that it is simply the product of γ (surface tension) by S, then, we will look at what is equal the surface of a sphere, we already know that it is 4*pi*R^2, no difficulty.
Now, I take the derivative of S with
R and I obtain simply 8*pi*R by derivative of R^2. Hence, this means that the variation of surface for an increment of radius dR is equal to 8*pi*R dR, it follows that the variation of surface energy is equal to γ*8*pi*R dR, result that
I carry over to my following sheet. Henceforth
I must determine what is the work of the pressure forces. These pressure forces
P2 - P1 have worked on a surface
4*pi*R^2 and according to an excursion dR. Hence, the work of the pressure, is simply
(P2 - P1)*4*pi*R^2 dR, if I equalize these two quantities, I obtain that P2 - P1 = 2*γ/R.
Hence, I find the factor 2 which is both the numerical value of the proportionality coefficient that I was looking for (of the
Laplace's law) but also and above all a positive number. Which means that our intuitive idea that P2 had to be greater to P1 is indeed verified. Now, we will try to make a similar reasoning in the case of a circular droplet, we will not consider a circular droplet because it does not really exist, fluid mechanics are not bi-dimensional, but we will instead consider a cylindric droplet and we will reason by units of length L. If I reason as previously,
I can easily determine that as
S is simply the surface of the cylinder
2*pi*R*L, it follows that dS, the variation of surface is 2*pi*dR*L. We have here a proportionality relation, i.e. a linear relation that links R to S, hence, the derivative is expressed extremely easily.
Here, I must to be accurate, multiply by my quantity L per unit length perpendicular to the screen, then I obtain the work of the pressure forces as previously so these pressure forces work on a cylinder 2*pi*R of surface 2*pi*R*L and on an excursion dR. Hence, if I equalize the two, the Ls fall and I obtain simply P2 - P1 = γ/R and so I find this time a factor 1 and not a factor 2, again the sign seems intuitive but why this change in numerical value
? The strength of Laplace's law is to propose a totally general form for the pressure difference at the boundaries of a curved interface.
This expression is the following, we must firstly introduce the total curvature which is the product of the two radii of principal curvature, in each point of a surface,
I define two osculating circles, the osculating circle of minimum radius, and the osculating circle of maximum radius. If I take the sum of the inverse of these radii, it defines me the total curvature. Hence, Laplace's law, in its expression the most general, is written simply P2 - P1 = γ(1/Rmin+1/Rmax), i.e, pressure difference = surface tension * total curvature. I will illustrate on a few example what is the value of this total curvature. First of all we can consider the most simple case, of the sphere. Of course the sphere, the two osculating circles in a given point have an equal radius, i.e. Rmin = Rmax
= R. It is really, the sphere, a surface extremely particular that has a uniform curvature in any point, equal in any point, equal to the radius of the sphere, so the total curvature, that we often write C is equal to 1/R+1/R = 2/R. Now, if I take the example of a cylinder, in a direction, the osculating circle that I manage to inscribe to a radius R, radius of the cylinder and in the other direction, however, the radius of curvature is infinite. We see that a line is absolutely not curved which means that its radius of curvature is infinite. Hence, the curvature of a cylinder, is simply
1/R and not 2/R. We hence see why the two formulas that we obtained for the circular droplet and the spherical droplet are not exactly the same, all of this is included in the most general formula of Laplace's law. If now, I take a form of a saddle, or a mountain pass,
I obtain two curvature radii of different sign, one is pointing outwards of the surface, the other is pointing inwards of the surface. These two radii can be equal in absolute value, I can come to an interesting situation where the curvature is 0. A situation of fluid mechanics where we will often encounter surfaces with zero curvature are in fact the situations in which the surface is open. If we take back the experiment of the catenoid that we have dealt with earlier on, we see that the pressure inside the catenoid is equal to the pressure outside the catenoid. Indeed, in both cases we have the atmospheric pressure. Hence, the sum of the two curvature radii must be equal to 0 in order to satisfy a pressure gap null. This shape that has both curvature radii equal is called catenoid. When we progressively moved apart the two cylinders, we force the shape to curve itself more and more until the film is broken. So according to you, why does the film break? Does the film break because locally the soap film becomes too thin ? Does the film break because the catenoid solution stops existing or does the film break because the surface energy that is composed by the two full discs is inferior to the one of the catenoid
? It is a question quite interesting, we will come back to it in the exercises. I will still now, just for the fun of it, propose a little reasoning in terms of force in the case of the circle. As we have done in previous chapter, we can always interpret the surface tension either as an energy per unit area, or as a force per unit length... And it is what I am trying to do here, so if I call
F the force that is exerted by the tension along the interface, this tension force.
I see that the tension force, named gamma, is exerted once projected along the vertical in the form of 2 (because there is twice the force, to the left and to the right), 2*γ*θ/2, in the same way, the pressure force is applied on a surface more or less flat, the cosine of θ is roughly equal to
1 and of length θ*R, it is the length of the circular arc, hence, I have this identity.
If I equalize these two quantities, I obtain
P2- P1 = γ/R, we find again previous result. 
Hence, we have demonstrated in two particular cases, the sphere and the circle, and by two different method : Laplace's law, the demonstration of the general formula of Laplace's law requires methods of vectorial analysis that are beyond the scope of this course. Another small experiment that will continue developing an intuition on the important consequences of Laplace's law : Let's imagine that we have connected a small bubble to a bigger bubble with a tube and that we have managed to close this tube with a valve and that suddenly, we open this valve.
What is going to happen ? Will the big bubble empty itself in the small one ? Or on the contrary, will the small one empty in the big one ?
Or will nothing move ? It is a question that challenges a little the intuition but in order to answer it, I will show you an answer with an experiment firstly.
Now that we have discovered the answer with an experiment, namely that the small bubble empties itself in the big one, we will try to understand why. We know, under
Laplace's law, that the overpressure inside the bubble is inversely proportional to the radius of the bubble. Hence, the overpressure inside the small bubble is greater than the overpressure inside the big bubble. Yet, when we connect two tanks of pressure by a tube, the flow is always created from the high towards the low pressure, it is what we call, when the fluid is sufficiently viscous or sufficiently slow, in any case when Reynolds number is sufficiently small : Poiseuille's law. 
It is a principle very general that we can easily understand when we do a force balance on the entire tube.
The friction forces of the fluid that are rubbing the wall are compensated exactly by the pressure gradient at the boundaries of this tube and by virtue of the sign of the flow and so of the sign of the shear, so of the friction to the wall. It is clear that the flow is always created from the high towards the small pressure. In our case, where we have connected our two bubbles, the flow is created from the small towards the big and so empties the small bubble in the big one.
