Welcome to our MOOC, massively online open course on basic steps on magnetic resonance.
Today, we shall be talking about spin-spin couplings that are the subject of chapter three of Peter Hore's book.
The appearance of multiplets in NMR spectra is familiar to all practitioners of analytical NMR, quite familiar to virtually all chemists, to many biologists, and even to a few physicists.
However, not all of these are aware of the subtle aspects of muliplet structures.
Spin-spin couplings were originally discovered by a serendipity in the 1950s by Erwin Hahn, in Berkeley.
Erwin Hahn noticed that spin echoes were modulated.
This observation came shortly after Hahn's invention, or perhaps one should say discovery, of spin echoes.
More about this in chapter six.
Such echo modulations can be observed, even when the homogeneity of the static field is too poor to resolve the multiplet structures.
As indeed, was usually the case in the 1950s.
Scalar couplings have a few important properties.
First of all, there are isotropic.
That means they do not depend on the orientation of the molecule, with respect to the external field.
And they are also field independent.
That is to say, they have the same magnitude at say 400 or 800 megahertz.
They are mediated by electrons via the so-called Fermi interaction, and are set to be through-bond as opposed to through-space.
It is still a challenge today to calculate scalar couplings constants with reasonable accuracy.
If the coupling constants are known, the mutiplets, due to scalar couplings, can be predicted with remarkable accuracy by simple diagonalization of the matrix representation of the Hamiltonian in the product base.
The agreement between theory and experiment is viewed by some as a nice confirmation that quantum mechanics actually works.
Works perfectly in this case.
This perfection is due to the fact that Hilbert space, the space that contains all the states, is a finite dimension.
Multiplets due to scalar couplings give crucial information about molecular symmetry.
They often great opportunity to practice group theory.
Multiplets, due to scalar couplings, give unique insight into populations of rotamers, and into their inter-conversion.
Another fascinating aspect, where anomer allows the chemists to grasp the mobile, flexible, and generally speaking, dynamic nature of most molecules.
Chapter three, of Peter Hore's little book on nuclear magnetic resonance, is dedicated to spin-spin couplings.
In a characteristic fashion,
Peter Hore speaks first about the manifestations of these effects in a sort of empirical fashion.
And then, proceeds to explain where they really come from.
So, you will see these chapters, one right after the other as usual.
So multiplets, particularly in proton NMR spectra, are quite familiar to the practicing chemist.
Particularly to organic chemists because they allow them to identify the fragments of the molecules that they are trying to analyze, or that they have synthesized or hope to synthesize.
Now, we shall start with the very important example of ethenol again, but now observed in a magnetic field.
A modern magnet that has a sufficient homogeneity so that we can not only resolve the three chemical shifts of the OH methylene and methyl protons, but also the fine structure.
The fine structure which is due to the scalar couplings.
And as most chemists will know, the CH2 group is split into, a quartet because the CH2 group has as neighbor the CH3 group.
While the CH3 group is split into a triplet, because its neighbor is a CH2.
This kind of logic is kind of instinctive for many chemists, but in fact, it's not so easy to explain.
And one of our objectives is to go into some detail in the course of this chapter.
Multiplets are perhaps best explained in so-called heteronuclear systems where we have for example, one proton, which has a spin 1/2 with two states, alpha and beta.
And one carbon-13, also with two states, alpha and beta.
Now we can take a molecule, which only contains two such spins.
For example, the conjugate base of formic acid, or formate, if you will, which abut from this proton here, has a single carbon-13.
About 1% in natural abundance, or up to 100% if we enrich the material in the upper isotope.
Now, there will be two spectra.
There is, if we take a field of 9.4 tesla, then there will be a chemical shift here in the vicinity of 400 megahertz
And another chemical shift of the carbon-13 in the vicinity of 100 megaghertz.
In both cases, however, we do not see singlets, but we see doublets.
So the proton signal is split into a doublet and so is the carbon signal.
And it turns out that the splitting exactly is exactly the same.
If we wonder where this comes from, we have to look at the energy level diagram.
And remember that spectral transitions, or lines in the spectrum always correspond to differences in energies.
If we consider a single isolated proton, than it can be either parallel, its polarization can be parallel with the magnetic field.
We sometimes call this the alpha state.
Or it can be anti-parallel, in which case, we call it the beta state.
Of course, between the two energies, there is only one transition which is near 400 megahertz.
And consequently, we observe a singlet, like here.
But if we now have a carbon-13 in the vicinity, it turns out that that carbon-13 itself can be alpha or beta.
And in this case, we assume that the carbon is in the beta, that is to say the anti-parallel configuration.
And remains in the beta anti-parallel configuration while the proton is undergoing its transition.
It turns out, and this is the manifestation of the scalar coupling, that the splitting between these two states is larger than the splitting between the two states in the absence of a carbon.
Conversely, if we consider a carbon which is polarized parallel to the magnetic field, in the alpha configuration like here, then it turns out that the splitting between the two levels, where the proton goes from parallel to anti-parallel is reduced.
And if we think of the spectrum, in this case, the splitting is enhanced from here to here.
And consequently, the line moves from central frequency to higher frequencies.
Remember that high frequencies in spectra run from right to left, in anomer anyway.
Whereas, the other line here has a reduced energy splitting and therefore, a lower frequency.
So this line turns out on the right-hand side.
So the effect of the scalar coupling, we could call it one-bond scalar coupling, because there's only one bond between these two nuclei.
In formate, is to split the line of the proton into a doublet.
And likewise, weakens difference argument, split the carbon-13 into this doublet with this same spacing.
Now, we can try to do this argument, in its likely more general way, and it's more fundamental so that we can include arbitrary energies and arbitrary numbers of spins.
For example, if we consider the energy of a state.
So we have now many states and these states are specified by magnetic quantum numbers,
<i>m</i>, lowercase <i>m</i>, which could be either <i>m</i>A, can be either plus 1/2, or minus 1/2.
And so each energy level diagram is specified by two quantum numbers and each of them can be either plus or minus 1/2.
And having said that, the energy level diagram is primarily determined by this expression, <i>h</i> times Nu.
That's the Larmor frequency of spin A.
And then h times NuX, that's the Larmor frequency of spin X.
Each in this case is
Planck's constant, Planck, because the energy here is expressed in joule, as it should be in the international system.
Though, in practice, NMR spectroscopists often express their frequencies in hertz, which you can achieve by dividing the energies by Planck's constant.
So we often write things is hertz, which amounts to energy divided by Planck.
Now anyway, in this equation, it is written correctly in terms of joules.
And you see that the main effect comes from the offset, from the chemical shifts, excuse me.
But there is this perturbing term here, which is due to the scalar coupling between A and X.
And it turns out if <i>m</i>A and <i>m</i>X have the same sign, then we have a positive contribution of 1/4 times h times A.
If they have opposite sign, then we have a negative contribution.
So we see this very nicely on this diagram.
First of all, we start with a molecule in the absence of a magnetic field.
Then we switch on the field for the A nucleus, we see a splitting.
So this is the Zeeman splitting across spin A, which could be the proton.
And then we have another
Zeeman splitting for spin X, typically the carbon-13 by the way of this ratio splitting to this splitting should be equal to the ratio of the gamma carbon divided by gamma protons.
And then we see the effect of the coupling is to increase this somewhat, because the two magnetic quantum numbers are minus 1/2 times minus 1/2 is of course, plus 1/4.
So we have an increase here.
And here, because we have a product of minus 1/2 and plus 1/2, the product will be minus 1/4.
And indeed, the energy decreases like this.
Here, it's again minus 1/4 because the off that product goes down.
And here, it's plus 1/4, and indeed, the energy goes up.
So this is clearly a manifestation of this equation.
So, in practice, if we look at the transitions, we see that the A transitions in the absence of splitting of a J-coupling, we have just one line for the A, that would be in this case, the proton.
And one other line for the carbon.
But as soon as we introduce this interaction, the J then the A splits up into doublet, and the X spectrum splits up in a doublet with equal spacing.
And in this diagram, you can see that they have aligned, or Peter Hore has aligned these arrows here with the line in the spectrum.
And this logic has been used throughout.
It is interesting to notice that
Peter Hore likes to draw energy level diagrams in this vertical fashion.
Many NMR spectroscopists are tempted to draw a diagram more in this fashion, in the fashion of a lozenge where these would be the transitions of one spin.
And this would be the transitions of another spin.
And somehow, some of us think it's easier to remember this.
So this would be for a homonuclear system.
Or for this heteronuclear system, you would have large transitions for spin A and smaller transitions, smaller energy differences, for transition
So this would be the A transitions, and this would be the X transitions.
Some people prefer this kind of drawing over this sort of vertical, ladder representation.
It turns out that in larger spin systems, with three or more spins, we have more complicated multiplets.
And that these multiplet patterns can be built up, as it were, from different splittings that are invoked one after the other in a sort of cascade of splittings, or sometimes called a 'tree'.
And we can see here, that if we have a given spin that resonates at a chemical shift A, it will be split into a doublet if we have a neighboring spin M with a coupling JAM.
And this doublet will again be separated, split into a sub-doublet by spin X with a coupling AX.
And so, if we assign different, spins different polarizations, it turns out that the left-most line in the multiplet, if all the couplings are positive, corresponds to a situation where both M and X are negative.
Or they could both be in the beta position.
Whereas, in the second line from left, the spin M is still in the beta position, but alpha has flipped over from beta to alpha.
And so, this can be assigned like this.
And so this is a very elaborate way of interpreting the different components of a multiplet in terms of states.
I should say at this level, that one cannot circumstrict energy level diagrams like this.
And for example, for a two-spin system, it would be like this.
And if we have a third system, then it would be like this.
So we have two lozenges, and we connect them like this.
And it turns out that the parallel transitions of this cube correspond to transitions of spin A and other parallel transitions.
For example, these could be the transitions of spin A and other transitions would be those of spin M and spin X.
But one of the purposes of this particular picture is to show under certain circumstances, the coupling between AM and AX may become equivalent.
And then we speak of a situation where spin A is coupled to a spin X, and another spin X, and in such a way that the scalar coupling constants are accidentally, or by symmetry, equal.
In that case, we have only one J, and it's called JAX.
And you can see what happens in this diagram, the central legs of these two doublets here become shifted on top of each other and become degenerate.
And this degeneracy means that the central line is twice as intense as the individual lines on the left-hand side.
And we can take this one step further.
We can consider the case where A is coupled to three different nuclei, all with the same coupling constant.
And so this is known as an AX3 system.
And in that case, we have a quadruplet with the so-called binomial intensity distribution.
And each line can be assigned to the polarization of the neighboring X nuclei.
Now it turns out that these multiplet patterns can be generalized in terms of so-called
Pascal's triangle.
Or this is just a way of rationalizing in a simple way, a binomial distribution.
You probably know how the Pascal triangle is built up.
For example, there's three, number three here is just the sum of numbers one and two on the line above.
And you can use that rule systematically all the way down.
And what you see here are the distributions.
So there are line distributions of different spin systems.
This is the isolated A spin, a two-spin system in AX2, AX3, etc., AX6.
Now you may think this is purely formal.
Well in fact, it is not.
And it goes a long way further.
You could for example, consider a situation where we have silicon-29, which has a spin 1/2.
And which is surrounded by four methyl groups.
This substance is called TMS, tetramethylsilane.
And in fact, it turns out that there are three times four,
12 equivalent protons.
So the system is actually an AX12 system, and you can imagine that you have to expand the Pascal triangle a very long way to go that far.
By the way, these intensity rules are not always easy to identify on the spectrum because it turns out that the outer lines here are very weak compared to the central lines.
And sometimes you just don't see the outer lines.
And one way of not being fooled by the fact that the outer lines may be drowned in noise, is to compare these inner lines of the central components.
In this case, we have 15:20:15, which is of course, distinct from 1:2:1.
And therefore, we can identify on which level of the Pascal triangle we are, without actually measuring, numbering out the full list of lines.
So, there are many cases where couplings involve nuclei, so-called quadrupolar nuclei, which have spin quantum number I, larger than 1/2.
The simplest example being the deuterium nucleus, which is a spin one
But there's also the nitrogen-14 nucleus with a spin one.
Or the lithium-6 nucleus with a spin one and many others.
Not to mention all the higher spins.
Now let's take a simple example where we consider a carbon.
In this case, a carbon-13 attached to a deuterium nucleus.
It turns out that, and we shall call this carbon nucleus, spin X, and the deuterium nucleus will be called spin A.
Now it turns out that the energy level diagram is composed of the following, for the deuteron, which has I equal one.
And therefore, magnetic quantum numbers of spin A can be either minus one or zero, or plus one.
While we find these three levels corresponding to the minus one, the zero and the plus one, quantum numbers of the deuteron.
And it split be this transition which actually is degenerate to this transition which is just the same interaction for the deuteron.
If we're in isotropic phase, these are always deuterons, so there's actually no evidence that this is a quadrupolar nucleus.
But if we look at the carbon-13 next door, then we have to take into account that there's also a splitting for the carbon-13.
And we see here that this one here, has let's call the quantum number S to avoid confusion.
And in this case, MX can be minus 1/2, or plus 1/2.
This is what we call a beta or alpha state.
And you see that now we have six energy levels, and we have a certain amount of transitions here.
We see on the carbon side, let's just say on the X side, we see these three transitions, so as before, this is nicely aligned with this peak and this is aligned with this peak.
And so you see there's a relationship between the energy level diagram and the spectrum.
Some people say that a spectrum is nothing else but a peculiar projection of the energy level diagram.
On the other hand, if we look at the A side, it turns out that this line and this line are still rigorously degenerate, have exactly the same frequency.
So they end up with a doubly degenerate line on this side here.
And likewise, these two transitions here are exactly degenerate and pile up on top of each other and give this doubly degenerate line.
The remarkable thing now is therefore, that on the X side, it's the carbon-13, we don't have a binomial triplet, but we have a triplet with equal intensities, 1:1:1.
Now, it turns out that there are more sophisticated quadrupolar nuclei.
And we have an example here of boron-11, which has spin quantum number <i>I</i> equals 3/2
And therefore, the <i>m</i> of the boron can go from minus 3/2 to minus 1/2, to plus 1/2, to plus 3/2.
So there are four distinct quantum states for each boron.
If we take this peculiar molecule, known as diborane, which comes from the condensation of two BH3 molecules.
So we have 2H3, two times, give a B2H6.
And it turns out that the structure of this B2H6 is a rather peculiar assembly that you see here, where we have so-called terminal protons, there are four of those.
And each of these terminal protons only sees one boron-11.
Incidentally, we assume that boron-10 has been eliminated by proper synthesis, synthetic preparation.
Now each proton sees just one boron, and consequently the terminal protons are split up into a quartet of four equal lines.
So we call this a non-binomial
1:1:1 quartet.
And that's characteristic of any spin 1/2 nucleus coupled to a spin 3/2 nucleus.
But more peculiar is what happens if we look at the bridge protons.
So these protons actually have equal bonds to two borons, and also equal scalar couplings.
In fact, the whole molecule, as we shall see, is completely symmetrical.
And these protons and these borons are magnetically equivalent.
But if we want to understand the fine structure of the peak, or the multiplet of that proton, the bridge proton, then we have to do a division into four peaks like this.
And each of them has to be subdivided again into four equal peaks.
But because the two couplings are equivalent, like we have seen in AX2 and AX3 systems, you see that there are now, for example, at this line here, there are two ways of getting there.
Either from here, or from here.
And therefore, the intensity of that line is twice as high as the first line.
So we get rather peculiar multiplets. which is not a binomial multiplet.
This does not fit into the logic of Pascal's triangle.
But you see where it comes from.
And by way of an exercise,
I would like to encourage you to think of the next level.
What happens if the proton were coupled to three boron nuclei?
Then of course, we have even more complex multiplet, and the challenge would be to determine its multiplicity.
This is not an academic question, since there are actual molecules that have that pattern.
So this concludes part one of this chapter.
Thank you for you attention.
