Welcome back to part three of this chapter.
So, it's also interesting to look at two-bond coupling constants, so, what we're talking about typically, here, is the coupling between a proton and another proton, mediated by two bonds attached, for example, to a common carbon.
And in the case here, if we look at the proton-proton coupling between these two protons attached to the same carbon, because these protons are not equivalent, it turns out that we can measure the coupling between them, and these couplings, as you see, are in the vicinity of a few hertz, and they are critically dependent on the question of if the substituent X here is an electron-donating or -withdrawing group.
In this case, the dependence is even more pronounced.
We see here, this is a coupling between two of the protons attached to the same carbon.
This is X, and now we're talking about this coupling here, and it turns out that these couplings are generally negative, and they are in the vicinity of -10 to -17 hertz.
Incidentally, you may not have heard of negative couplings before; very often, in the literature,
NMR literature, nobody mentions the sign of the coupling, and what people actually report is simply the absolute value of the coupling.
Of course, if you do it that way, you cannot see the sign.
The fact is that it is rather tricky to determine the sign, and it takes a bit of understanding of NMR, and particuarly of two-dimensional spectroscopy, of multiple-resonance, in order to detect the sign.
But, signs have been measured, and can certainly be calculated.
Now, some people have been looking for very exotic couplings, so that they have a chance to get a record in the Guinness Book, and here, for example, we have a very long-range coupling between two protons separated by one, two, three, four, five bonds.
Because of the delocalized structure of the electrons, this is about 2.2 hertz-- mind you, all units in this chapter are given in hertz.
And we can even go to seven bonds, and it turns out that we then have a negative coupling. Rather strangely.
You may wonder how one can measure this, because these two protons are magnetically equivalent.
Well, there is no multiplet structure, but what you do is, you replace one of them with deuterium, and then it becomes inequivalent, and you have a long-range J-coupling, and in this case, you can see that JHH is proportional to JHD, provided we multiply by the ratio of γH over γD.
So, we measure H-D in an asymmetric molecule, and then apply this rule in order to draw a conclusion about the H-H coupling.
More straightforward is benzene groups.
It turns out that ortho couplings between neighboring protons-- so this is an ortho coupling, of course-- is somewhere betwen seven and ten hertz, depending on the substituents.
Meta couplings are smaller, and para couplings are typically on the order of less than one hertz.
So, this is smaller, and this is almost negligible, although, of course, they can be detected.
Likewise, if we have molecules that are rigid-- this doesn't work if they are floppy, but if they are rigid, then we can have long-range couplings, provided the arrangement of the bonds is in a so-called W structure, that allows one to convey the information through the electrons.
There are some interesting properties of J-coupling constants that are worth knowing.
Some people have an encyclopedic knowledge about these things.
First of all, one can distinguish between proton-proton couplings that are on the cis-- on the same side of the double bond-- or trans.
So, cis and trans, and these couplings, as you can see, the cis are in the vicinity of 10, and the trans in the vicinity of 15 to 19.
It critically depends on the question, whether there is a substituent here in the third position.
So, many people, good chemists, can know these things by heart, and just from the knowledge of the coupling constant, they can tell you what the substituent X really is.
There are other examples here.
So, this is now the proton-proton coupling between these protons here-- that is to say, between vicinal protons-- and they are contained in a smaller range, but also depend on the substituent X.
This kind of observation is very important in chemistry of cyclohexanes and their derivatives, and in particular of sugars, because many sugar molecules are built on six-membered rings, with an oxygen, and, of course, hydroxy groups, but the basic pattern is a six-membered ring.
It turns out that, here, we can distinguish axial coupling-- so if there's a proton up here and a proton down here, then this is an axial-axial coupling, and that turns out to have a dihedral angle, if you look at the Newman diagram, of 180 degrees, and the scalar coupling is quite large, in the vicinity of 12 hertz.
But, if we now consider, for example, between this equatorial proton here and this axial here-- so, now, there is a 60 degree dihedral angle, and the coupling drops to about four hertz.
Likewise, between the two equatorials-- so, we compare this and this, there is also coupling between these two, and again, the dihedral angle, although it's not obvious from this diagram, is only 60 degrees, and the coupling is 3.9.
So, there are important lessons to be gained from looking at three-bond coupling constants.
Now, of course, this hasn't escaped the attention of some theoreticians, and there is a famous relation that was invented many years ago by Martin Karplus.
He got a Nobel prize a few years ago, but that was not for this equation.
His equation explains a relationship-- it's actually a partly empirical, partly theoretical relationship-- of which Karplus himself said that if you use it, it's at your own risk.
But, anyway,
I won't give the equation here, but the point is that the J-coupling between two protons in vicinal positions is dependent on the intermediate dihedral angle.
In fact, this J-coupling is largest if the angle is 180 degrees-- that is to say, if one proton is sitting here and the other is sitting there.
They are somewhat smaller, but not dramatically smaller if the angle is 0-- that is to say, if the two protons are eclipsed, if the back proton is hidden behind the front proton, so to speak.
And, they drop to something like two hertz or so if the angle is 90 degrees, which it frequently is.
Such relationships can, again, be calculated, using quantum chemistry, but they can also be observed in molecules, provided that you fix the angle.
You contrive the molecule with suitable substituents and rings and what have you, in order to prevent it from rotating.
Karplus postulated a famous equation which bears his name, and it says that a three-bond coupling is proportional to a constant, plus a factor B times cos(θ), which is the dihedral angle, plus a factor C times cos^2 (θ).
So, you see that if the limit that θ is equal to 90 degrees, then, of course, cos and cos^2 disappear, so 3J becomes equal to A.
In the limit that θ is equal to 180 degrees, then the cosine is -1 and the cosine squared is +1, so 3J is A-B+C.
And, of course, the limit when the angle tends to zero is 3J = A+B+C.
So, basically, this Karplus equation is a nice way of empirically catching that complexity.
We see such things if we look at amino acids.
An amino acid can be represented in a Newman projection.
So, in front here, we have what's known as the α carbon, which sustains, or is attached to, the carboxyl group and the ammonium group of the amino acid, and then behind it-- behind the disk of Mr. Newman-- is the β carbon, and on the β carbon we find the "residue," the rest of the chain, plus a β2 and a β1 proton.
And on the α carbon, of course, we have the α proton, and so the question is, what is the coupling between these two, and what is the coupling between these two?
It turns out that, depending on the angle θ, which is the angle through which these two planes are rotated, that these couplings vary dramatically.
For example, in this configuration, between α and β1, we have about 60 degrees, and between α and β2, we have 180.
In this configuration, this is about 60 and this is about 180.
So, you see that the coupling will vary, depending on the angle θ.
On average, we shall be observing the weighted average of the three couplings, and therefore we can draw conclusions as to the average value of this angle θ.
In fact, this is a rather modern subject.
We find similar things in polypeptide chains-- that is to say, chains of amino acids-- but in a slightly different disguise.
Here, we see there are couplings between the proton attached to the α, and the proton attached to the nitrogen, which is part of the amide bond.
And here, there is a coupling, so this is a 3J,
H attached to proton, and H alpha, will tell you about the dihedral angle here, which in the language of peptides is known as the angle φ, the other one being ψ and χ.
The knowledge of these couplings, which can be determined even in fairly large molecules, allows you to determine that angle, and if you know such angles from one peptide bond to the next, ultimately you can define the entire three-dimensional structure of the peptide, and that is a very flashy thing to do.
Now, in this chapter three of Peter Hore's book, there is also a brief discussion of dipolar couplings.
Dipolar couplings do not occur in liquids, as we shall see, but they occur in solids, and are very important as such.
They can be seen in solids in the form of splittings, but they also influence spectra in liquids, because they are essential to drive relaxation.
Relaxation, as we shall see, is a process through which the magnetization returns to its thermal equilibrium, and as such it's very important, both to be able to record NMR spectra, but also to determine certain molecular properties, such as internal motion, or diffusion coefficients-- rotational and translational diffusion.
So, dipolar couplings are a different type of thing.
What you see here is doublets of a spin A, coupled to a spin X, in a solid, as a function of the orientation.
The reason for these splittings is that we have a spin A-- so, somewhere here, let's call this spin A-- and then somewhere else in space there's another spin, call it spin X, and the direction, the distance, is described by a vector.
This molecule will be placed in an external magnetic field, which we call B0, as usual, and if we extend this internuclear vector, we find an angle here.
This is the angle called θ.
And it turns out that the energy level diagram is affected by the dipole-dipole coupling.
This has nothing to do with the J-coupling, it is nothing to do with electrons, it is purely mediated through space.
So, you see here, that there is an angular dependence.
In fact, this thing is called the Legendre polynomial of rank two, sometimes just called P2.
The peculiar property is that it depends on the orientation of this vector with respect to the magnetic field.
And so, you give an example here, of the doublet of this-- this is split into a doublet, it's a large doublet, if θ is zero-- that is to say, if this vector is aligned with the magnetic field.
Then, there comes a point where it goes through zero, the doublet collapses to a singlet.
That turns out to be the case when θ is equal to about 54 degrees, which is the so-called "magic angle."
And, if that is the case, we only have a singlet, and then the splitting reappears, and as we go to 90 degrees-- that is to say, if this vector is perpendicular to the external field, we have a splitting where the magnitude is one-half the splitting that we have if it's parallel.
It turns out that this splitting, which the authors call R-- rather un-typically, most other books call it D-- but it's proportional to the product of the gyromagnetic ratios of spin A and of spin X, and most importantly, it's inversely proportional to the third power of the distance between them.
So, R, in this case, is simply the length, the modulus of the vector that we have drawn here.
And that vector R, that distance R, of course, is interesting to chemists, because it allows you to measure the size of the molecule and the length, the distance, between two spins.
It turns out that if we consider powder, then there is no single orientation of this vector R.
So, let me draw the field again, and remember that we have an internuclear vector like this, which subtends an angle θ.
If we have a powder, that means that we have all sorts of particles, a bit like in sugar or in salt, that have different angles, and consequently, θ is distributed over a full range of angles.
It turns out that we then get a powder spectrum-- also invented by George Pake, by the way, in the '50s-- discovered for the first time, and <i>explained</i>, more importantly.
And it turns out that the small splitting here, RAX, which was on the previous transparency, corresponds to the case where θ is exactly equal to 90 degrees, and those crystallites are fairly common, because it's quite likely that the vector be perpendicular to the external field.
But this larger splitting, here, corresponds to θ equal to 180 degrees, and the signals are weaker here, in amplitude, because the likelihood that they should be precisely parallel to the magnetic field is much smaller.
In fact, you can see that this Pake pattern is made up of two halves.
It's actually a superposition of two paths, like this, and these are the two transitions of the doublets that we talked about.
Now, let's recapitulate, together with Peter Hore, what is to be said about J-couplings and dipolar couplings.
First of all, J-couplings require bonds.
They are mediated by electrons.
If there are no bonds, then there are no J-couplings.
Whereas, dipolar couplings go directly through space, and therefore can be intermolecular, whereas these can only be intramolecular.
J-couplings are weak, typically on the order of 100 hertz or something like that-- of course there are some exceptions, but that's an order of magnitude.
And, dipolar couplings tend to be much larger.
It depends on the γ of the nuclei, but 100 kilohertz is a good number.
J-couplings are isotropic.
That is what scalar coupling means.
Isotropic, in the sense that their magnitude is independent of the orientation of the molecule with respect to the magnetic field.
Dipolar couplings vary with the orientation, according to the Legendre polynomial which is 3cos^2 (θ) - 1, where θ is the angle subtended between the magnetic field, on the one hand, and the internuclear vector on the other.
Then, J-couplings tend to drop to small numbers if there are more than three bonds that separate the nuclei, whereas dipolar couplings always are proportional to the inverse of the third power, and therefore, insensitive.
J-couplings cause splittings in spectra in solution.
They also can be seen in solids, but it's more difficult because they're so small.
Whereas, dipolar couplings lead to splittings, large splittings, in solids, and also in more exotic things-- like liquid crystals-- such as partially-aligned molecules.
J-couplings do not contribute significantly to relaxation-- that is, the return of the magnetization to its equilibrium, but dipolar couplings are causing relaxation; in fact, they are driving relaxation, particularly in the presence of motion, and therefore, they give a way of determining this motion.
There are some comments here.
The strength of the interactions-- both this and this-- depend on the magnetogyric ratios--
I call them gyromagnetic, but that's the same thing-- and on the molecular structure.
The numbers are very approximate, so this is just to guide the eye.
They can be more complicated if there is chemical exchange going on, and one has to worry about internal motion.
So, in summary, spin-spin interactions-- they can be either J-couplings in liquids, or dipolar couplings in solids-- give rise to multiplets.
So, in liquid-state spectra, it's only J-couplings, and in solid-state spectra it's mostly dipolar couplings.
J-couplings usaully occur via chemical bonds, because they're mediated by electrons, and are generally small when the nuclei are more than three bonds apart.
J-couplings give information on bonding networks in molecules.
J-couplings within a group of magnetically equivalent spins do not produce any multiplet splittings.
So, as soon as you have identified an ensemble of spins that are magnetically equivalent, there is no evidence that there are couplings between these spins.
Strongly-coupled spins have more complex spectra than weakly-coupled spins.
Particularly, when we have a two-spin system, the inner lines tend to grow at the expense of the outer lines, and this is known as a "roof effect," and in larger spin systems they can be very, very complicated.
Dipolar couplings occur through space, and normally do not lead to multiplets in liquid-state NMR spectra, unless we happen to be in materials or in molecules like liquid crystals, that are partly aligned with respect to the magnetic field, but this is clearly a very exotic subject.
Thank you for your attention.
