So welcome to our MOOC on magnetic resonance.
This is now the second half of chapter three where we shall be speaking more about spin-spin couplings.
We should now address a tricky issue of equivalent nuclei.
It turns out-- and this is very nicely described in Peter Hore's book.
I think it's one of the best books on this subject.
There are two forms of equivalence.
There is a chemical equivalent that's fairly easy to understand.
That means that you have two nuclei that cannot be distinguished in chemical terms.
One cannot substitute one without substituting the other.
One cannot replace one.
One cannot conceive of a reaction that would affect one without affecting the other.
That's one thing.
And then there is the concept of magnetic equivalence which is much more subtle and more difficult to define.
Let us start with a simple application.
First of all, we have this magnetic equivalent pair here where these two protons have the same coupling with the two fluorine.
So if we take this coupling here or this coupling here, it turns out that by symmetry of this molecule, these two couplings are the same.
Likewise if we started with the two fluorines, they also have the same couplings to the two protons.
But this is not so, so these two here are the same.
But if we look at this coupling here, which is a cis coupling, it's different.
Different magnitude perhaps even a different sign from this long-range coupling here, the trans coupling.
So this is distinct from this and therefore, there are two different cases.
Well, it turns out that Peter Hore has a wonderful way of explaining how you can check for the existence of magnetic equivalent nuclei.
First of all, you define an ensemble of nuclei A, B, C, etcetra of nuclei of which you want to decide whether they are magnetically equivalent or not, such as in this case
Proton A and Proton B.
And then you define external nuclei, if they exist, like in this case.
This fluorine which we call Z, or rather Peter Hore uses that nomenclature.
And then he says,
"If the J coupling between A and Z is equal to the J coupling between B and Z, is equal to the J coupling between C and Z, and all similar things, in that case, we have magnetic equivalence."
And if that is not the case as in this molecule here, then we have only chemical equivalence.
We shall see in spectra that has dramatic consequences.
Now this test here, where we compare the scalar couplings between A, B, C and an external nucleus Z, in principle has to be repeated for different external nuclei.
For example we once do it for Z and then we have to do it all over again for the nucleus Z prime.
In practice it turns out that once you have a negative answer for one of them you don't need to check the others.
Magnetic equivalence needs to be reflected about, thought about carefully.
Now. there are cases which are not obvious.
For example this is dodecahedron-- has the molecule or formula C20 H20.
If all carbon are C12, which is not obvious but if it's depleted in carbon 13, then we have no other nuclei than the 20 chemically equivalent protons.
And so there is no Z.
There is no external nucleus Z, and consequently we can't conduct the test and it turns out that all 20 protons are magnetically equivalent and not only chemically equivalent.
The same is true on a much more mundane molecule which is that of benzine.
There we have six benzene protons, as you all know, and in this case they're all equivalent because there is no proton Z or no carbon Z and that could prove that they are inequivalent.
Now, multiplet patterns can be used to check for molecular symmetry or to confirm or reject a hypothesis about the symmetry of the molecule.
And Peter Hore has collected some wonderful examples for phosphorus 31 NMR spectra in these compounds which contain only phosphorus and sulphur.
So the large spheres represent the phosphor atoms and the small spheres the sulphur atoms,
And you can see they can be different arrangements.
And it turns out that sulphur has no spin at least the dominant isotope has 99% but it has no spin.
And therefore, we can ignore it and we we only have to worry about the chemical shifts and about the equivalence, chemical or magnetic equivalence, of the phosphorus nuclei.
So it turns out that in a configuration like this, again there is no atom Z.
There's no nucleus Z that could conceivably have different couplings with the different A nuclei and the four phosphorus nuclei and therefore it turns out that these four As are on the same environment.
They're chemically indistiguishable and furthermore they are magnetically equivalent.
And therefore we call them A4.
This system has a different symmetry.
You immediately see that these two nuclei are-- these phosphorus are sitting between three sulphurs, whereas, these phosphorus nuclei have another phosphorus for a neighbor and then only two sulphurs as a neighbor.
So chemically, they're quite different.
In fact, they also have different chemical shifts but when it comes to the symmetry, it turns out that the coupling between one of these As and the two Xs is equal and so we have an A2X2 system.
And the result of that is that on the A side we have a triplet and on the X side we also have a triplet.
This is a more complicated case where this phosphorus on top here has three sulphurs.
A bit like what we had before but at the bottom here, we have a phosphorus which is squeezed between two other phosphorus, whereas the other phosphorus are squeezed between a phosphorus and two sulphurs.
So clearly we have three different chemical environments and it turns out that we have an AMX2 system because the only equivalence, the only magnetic equivalence, is between these two X nuclei and the consequences are as you can see.
Example here in the A multiplet, we have a large triplet due to the coupling between A and X.
The X are the neighboring phosphorus nuclei and a smaller coupling JAM between the A and the distant M nucleus.
So this is a wonderful example on how we can look at the spectra and draw conclusions as to the symmetry of the molecule.
Now there are also amusing cases when we look at lithium 7 or lithium 6 is also an interesting case.
But lithium 7 has a spin 3 halves.
This is a little bit like boron 11 that we have discussed before.
In this case we consider a strange molecule which is actually a cluster comprising four lithium atoms arranged according to a tetrahedron.
And it turns out that you can attach these tertial butyl group, and that they are not attached to one of the lithium atoms but they tend to attach themselves to the middle of the triangular surface of one of these sides of the cluster.
Very mysterious chemistry but the NMR is without any doubt proving that this structure is the true structure and not the one that you might intuitively draw.
Well it turns out that because of this structure if we look at the lithium spectrum, lithium 7 spectrum, which as I said has a spin three-halves, we shall see an ordinary binomial quartet because of the splitting to three equivalent carbon 13 which are-- so each lithium in effect sees three carbons.
For example, if you take this lithium at the top here, it sees this carbon 13 and this carbon 13 and this carbon 13 as equivalent.
And therefore, we have this wonderful quartet.
On the other hand, we could also decide to enrich this cluster with lithium 6.
Lithium 6 has spin one, so it will split its neighboring carbon into three equivalent lines with amplitude one to one to one but then it turns out that each carbon is coupled to three lithium nuclei and therefore gives ride to this very strange non-biominal multiplet which is comprised of three interleaved triplets.
So I vividly recommend you to look at this.
This is in fact similar to what you have seen in diborane except that now it's a coupling to three neighboring nuclei.
In four-spin systems we have more complicated structures as you might expect but they're fairly easy to rationalize.
In fact, we can simply take the proton NMR spectrum of dibromonitrobenzene.
This is of course a very simple molecule.
And we can see that we have here a proton A which is squeezed between a proton P and a proton M.
The couplings here, the ortho-couplings are not exactly equal but they are similar.
And then we have this X here which is across the ring, so to speak, and that will have a long range para coupling to the A and medium range to the meta positions P and M.
And as a result, the A multiplet will be split into what is sometimes called the pseudo triplet.
In fact it's just a doublet of doublets with very closely related couplings.
And there's a fine structure which is a doublet which is due to the para position X.
The M on the other hand is split into a large coupling because of the J A M.
And then each line is split into a doublet and again into a doublet first because of P and then because of X.
Likewise, the same logic applies to spin P which is very similar to spin M as far as the structure of the multiplet is concerned.
And finally spin X is a pseudo triplet because they're almost equivalent couplings to P and to M.
Each component is split into a small doublet because of the para coupling between X and M.
This kind of spectrum can allow you to determine this molecular structure almost without any other help.
There is an interesting phenomenon in scalar coupled multiplets and this is known as strong coupling or sometimes known as second order coupling.
And you can see that we have a system that evolves from a case where the splitting here, the J splitting, is much smaller than the difference in chemical shifts.
In this case we speak of an AX system but when the chemical shifts come closer, then we notice that the multiplets not only become closer as you might expect but also they change the amplitude ratios here.
The inner lines become stronger and the outer lines become weaker.
And in a case like that, we use two letters in the alphabet which are closer together and we speak of an AB system.
And ultimately, if the two chemical shifts become degenerate, if fact we have only one line over, left over, and then we speak of an A2 system.
So to understand strong coupling we have to use a little bit of quantum mechanics.
This is not treated in any detail in the first volume of Peter Hore that I recommended to you but there is a second book that you may wish to read in a year from now maybe that is written by Steve Wimperis and Jeremy Jones and the same Peter Hore in the same series, the Oxford Primer series and that speaks about such quantum mechanic effects.
Well in this case you should know that we have to explain the case where we have the AX system where we have just two doublets we have the AB system where the two doublets move close together so that the inner lines become more intense and the case of the A2 system.
It turns out that all three can be explained in one equation by saying that the bottom state, that's this one here, where the two spins are parallel with the magnetic field is not affected by this phenomenon so they're always the same.
It's always a simple state with alpha alpha.
Likewise, the upper state here where the two spins are anti-parallel is unaffected.
It doesn't matter whether the system is strongly or weakly coupled but the intermediate states called psi2 and psi3 they are mixed.
In fact, they are neither alpha beta nor beta alpha but there is a wonderful admixture between these two and the coefficience are cosine of an angle chi and sine of an angle chi.
Now this angle actually is determined by the ratio of the J coupling and the difference in chemical shifts.
So to draw this in, sort of, simple trigonometry, if we draw the chemical shift horizontally like this, so this would be a number in hertz, and if we draw the scalar coupling vertically, also a number in hertz, then we can make a little diagram like this and we can have this line here and this angle here is 2 xi.
So you can immediately see when the J coupling goes to zero or becomes much smaller than the difference in chemical shifts then xi goes to zero.
So the limit of xi going to zero means that if we take state xi 2 the cosine goes to one and the sine goes to zero and this is a pure alpha beta.
Alpha for spin A and beta for spin B.
And likewise if we take the limit of xi going to zero for xi 3, then only the cosine term survives so this would be a pure state where spin A is in beta polarization and spin B is in the alpha polarization.
So you can see from this diagram that the large J compared to the difference in chemical shifts, the steeper the slope, the closer this angle to xi approaches 90 degree and therefore the angle xi turns to 45 degree.
It's therefore interesting to see the limit.
One xi goes to 45 degree.
We see from this equation that the cosine and the sine become equal. and so if we take that function then it's just one over square root of two, alpha beta plus beta alpha.
Likewise, the limit for xi going to 45 degrees, so this is still the case where this J coupling is much larger than the difference in chemical shift of the other function goes to one over square root of two and here we have minus alpha beta plus beta alpha.
Now you notice that the case of the A2, you see there is this symmetrical linear combination which is what we have here.
This is symmetrical in the sense that if you do a permutation of spins A and B, this wave function doesn't change.
It is invariant to the permutation and is known as totally symmetric.
Whereas the other wave function, this one here, that's the one that I just concocted up here, is anti-symmetric with respect to permutation of the spins.
It turns out that this first state together with the top state and the bottom state, that these three together form what is known as a triplet.
That is to say three states of the same symmetry.
Whereas this guy here is known as a singlet.
And the remarkable thing is that now the intensity that we see here in the spectrum is made up of two lines, only two lines, that are degenerate and occur on top of each other.
One corresponds to this transition to the middle component, the triplet, and the other line corresponds to the top transition within the triplet.
Whereas the transitions from the bottom line to the singlet are forbidden so that's represented by this dotted line and
I cross it out to show that these two transitions are completely forbidden.
In fact, they are here virtually, so to speak.
If you look at their frequencies, they are a plus and minus J away from the central component but their intensity are vanishingly weak and that is why we cannot see them.
This kind of quantum mechanics has been known for decades but it has gained some renewed interest very recently because it turns out that the populations here flow quite freely within this triplet manifold as a result of what we shall call longitudinal or spin lattice relaxation.
Whereas the populations are locked in the singlet state and cannot flow from the singlet to the triplet state.
So if one can contrive some way of populating the singlet state, then the populations would be locked in there and one can have so called long-lived states.
This is the speciality of Malcolm Levitt in Southampton and we have done a lot of work in Lausanne to try to improve techniques to populate the singlet states.
This concludes part two of this chapter.
Thank you for your attention.
