Today we'll discuss community-based organizations and their roles.
Over the past decades we've seen in Africa the emergence of a new party in the form of community-based organizations.
Regrouping populations, often their poorest members, who get together to work among such organizations in order to both, participate in managing their future, and to assist the State or local authorities with decision-making.
That's the basic plan.
We'll take a look at some of the processes which involve these community-based organizations.
One often associates community-based organizations with civil society.
Civil society is much broader than our definition of it here.
In Africa It practically doesn't exist or, on the contrary, it is very active.
Let's put aside for a moment this question of civil society, to instead concentrate on community-based organizations who form the battalion of the poorest in African cities.
When we say community-based organization we mean participation, we mean participatory decision-making.
There are many forms of participation,
And of course we have, as always, between a weak and a strong participation a cursor, which can move, depending on the country, depending on the city, but also depending on the project.
Projects for which there is very strong demand and a very strong participation of community-based organizations.
Why? Because these are decisions which directly affect the community, and perhaps because when it comes to our ability to make decisions, it is very weak, if not nonexistent, at higher levels.
There are, then, different types of participation.
We'll highlight the five main ones.
To begin with, appropriation.
Communities have decision-making power, and it's the State who takes the initiative when the community demands it.
There is cooperation.
It is the State and the communities who work together with one sole objective.
Often the processes are assisted by others, especially by NGOs, but there is a sort of coproduction on the decision and on the project.
There is consultation.
Thus the communities won't make the decisions, but will be consulted on projects to seek their input, and then the project will be modified in a timely manner based on the results of this consultation.
There is the information level, which is a summarized version of the consultation.
Usually the communities are informed of what will happen.
And subsequently there is manipulation, where, ultimately, the communities are used instead for the wrong reasons.
They are given the impression that they have a say, yet the decisions had already been taken well in advance.
We see that nevertheless there is a split, we have manipulation for all the wrong reasons.
Here we have the four top ones, for the right reasons, with, once again, the cursor which points strongly towards appropriation, as the communities demand, and the State acts, and the lowest level of participation, which is consultation.
Between the two there is room to move, and we have varying levels of participation.
What was just said is for the participation of all development projects as a whole.
We can go further in participation, up to participatory budgeting, which can be divided into four phases.
The first phase, preparatory, we'll mobilize citizens.
Second phase, the identification of problems and needs, where we define priorities.
A subsequent phase of execution and provision of services as identified, and a supervision phase of what has been done and the audit.
So first, we'll prepare, then identify and allocate budgets, do the work, supervise what has been completed, to then return to the start, a chain which allows us to revisit and modify based on what has been found during the supervision of what was requested.
There is truly a daily control over the allocation of the different budgets.
This is, I would venture, an absolute form, which may possibly be at the local community level, but which involves, in any event, community-based organizations.
These are ordinary people who have in their hands this question of participatory budgeting.
There are communities who are given only a portion of the participatory budgeting, but the interest lies in the fact that they feel a responsibility, an accountability on the part of the inhabitants for the budgets.
Together they decide how much will be allocated, and where, and then together they control these allocations.
So this is the participatory budget, with or without community-based organizations.
That's all we'll say for now on participatory budgeting, because the lecture was only on community-based organizations.
After we'll return to it, but for now what are the development projects, which might be handled at the level of community-based organizations, with the State.
We also have the very important question of housing.
There are large housing programs, or perhaps housing benefits, which can be implemented with, at the same time, community-based organizations and the State.
Infrastructure, of course.
Often it is the basic infrastructure in neighborhoods, certainly not about building a large roadway together.
But all that is infrastructure and basic facilities within the neighborhoods enters into the transactions which the communities have with the State.
Urban dynamism.
We can, within these given areas, reinvigorate, spark urban renewal, where a certain number of social programs enable us to live together in harmony.
Thus with the possibility we have to work on-site on these social programs, community-based organizations are,
I'd say, the strongest link to them.
And finally, the question of waste management.
Community-based organizations can play a very important role here, because it involves being actually on the ground.
We quickly realize that what the State lacks is this anchor to the ground, and being able to manage it with local communities.
This allows access to a central authority, or even to a decentralized power.
It allows access on the ground with those who face difficult situations on a daily basis.
In return, of course, the State must play a role.
It can not simply be demanding of the community-based organizations, but should primarily recognize them, which is no small task, for within the normal plan of governing, this civil society, these organizations, do not exist.
So we're dealing with different stages or strata of the State, but the first thing to do is to recognize these organizations.
Next to offer technical assistance for the development of their projects, assist them with the financing of these projects.
The State finds within these community-based organizations a neighborhood base.
But for this to happen the State must also invest in it, the two levels of decision-making must be addressed.
And the State must recognize their right to have a say, which is without doubt one of the most difficult tasks, because it requires that a place be made for this within the plan, within the organization, within the actual governing of the city.
So limits and conclusions.
Limits, there are two.
It is that participatory decision-making, as we've already seen in a certain number of cases, does not work.
It works as long as it involves decision-making on facilities, on layout, within the neighborhoods.
It works a bit less successfully, or not at all, when it involves city planning on a macro level.
When we want to install large networks, roadways, it becomes difficult to include the participation of all the city's inhabitants.
The main result of this participation, of these participatory processes, is that in the end, the decision is that nothing will get done.
So if we want the city to evolve at some point, we must also make decisions on a centralized level.
And rather than having to apply one plan or another, we must realize that, depending on the projects, depending on the challenges of these projects, we must make them to some degree participatory.
It is perhaps cynical to say these sorts of things, but we must recognize the limits of the system, and realize that we cannot ask the whole of a city's population for their advice on this or that project.
So there we are perhaps at the level of informing rather than participating.
We must inform and show clearly what we are in the process of doing; this is undeniable.
This is, I'd say, the foundation, but there are certainly times when one can go even further in the participatory process, and others when it must be placed on the back burner.
The end result is that, now that we've seen these important trends, these new methods of urban governance, these community-based organizations, decentralization, we must know how to utilize them.
There is no out-of-the-box solution, there is no plan that should be applied to all African countries.
We must simply recognize the validity of community-based organizations, recognize them, and in collaboration with them see in which measures they might or might not take part in the decision-making.
