Another tool, the S.I.G.
The SIG.
We should understand that this is a tool which helps us, often to make decisions, but that is not an end in itself.
There is a tendency today in African cities to think that all should be resolved by the SIG.
This is false.
It is an aid which should be used when one can, or when one needs it.
It's an aid which also requires resources.
But we must be nuanced in our utilization of SIGs.
In a fair number of today's African cities there are SIGs which were created, but which are not up to date, which no longer serve any purpose.
So we must pay very, very close attention to what we do.
The definition of a SIG.
It is a tool which provides information on geographic indications, as well as alphanumeric indications, to help in decision-making.
One is not simply limited to one map, but can click on a geographic zone and find out its attributes.
This allows us to link, for example, a population to a neighborhood.
There are two approaches, one technical, the other functional.
The technical approach is an automated way of handling a certain amount of data, often obtained via cartography.
The functional approach is a manner of treating and communicating information, a tool for decision-making.
So within this functional approach, decision-making is the final objective of the SIG.
A double approach, as we've said, at once a spatial approach and an alphanumeric approach.
Here we are in a database system, and here via cartography.
This can be of vectors, or images, and the two together form the SIG.
Now, another example.
We have here a certain number of lots, in the land registry.
At the same time we have this lot here, for example, with its spatial data, and we have attribute data like the number of the lot or, for example, the name of the owner. and the attribute data like, for example, the number of lot and the name of the owner.
Now, two modes of representation: raster and vector.
Let's look at the example of raster.
We have an image with an invisible grid, but each square has a value.
This is raster mode.
Of course the grid is much smaller, but each pixel can be attributed to a value.
The vector is different.
If we have a line, we can have a point, or we can have a surface.
These are the two methods of spatial representation which we utilize.
With vector data we can have polygons, a certain number of parcels, for example, each one closed off.
We might also have polylines, not tree branches, but an example of waterways, or a pipeline network.
And then we can have a certain number of points, each one corresponding to an index.
These are, roughly, the three types.
Polygons, polylines and points.
The three types of vector data which we utilize.
Raster data, might be for land use, or, for example an elevation model.
Now the vector object in our database will be like this, or a line, with a beginning and end point, as well as a curve equation.
And with this we'll move to a database with a certain number of data points, the whole of which being what interests us, not just a vector or a curve, but rather the vectors plus the database.
The operation of a SIG.
We have a real situation, which we'll measure and observe.
In the SIG we'll have a certain amount of data, and we'll do certain analyses.
We can also do some mapping.
So this will be a tool for communication and decision-making, this decision having, of course, an influence on the real situation.
We'll make the loop with this plan which is unending, but which should help us to reach improved situations.
A sort of virtuous circle, based on the SIG.
Don't forget this is but a tool, which won't resolve all problems, but when dealing with a real situation one analyzes, one measures, one observes, and then one communicates, one makes decisions which modify this real-life situation.
The main components of a SIG.
Naturally, the data, without which we'd have nothing, as we just discussed.
It's also a question of hardware, of the machine.
One must have a computer which can process all this.
It's a question of software, but also a question of users, for there still must be people behind the machines, it won't happen automatically, as well as the processes put in place between users, and between the user and the machine, in order to manage the diagnosis.
Don't forget that it is not the SIG which will manage things, but the user.
It is an aid in decision-making.
We perform certain analyses with the SIG, based on the data, but it is not the machine which will decide which plan you will subsequently develop.
In summary, the SIG is meant to respond to different questions.
Where? What? How? When? and If.
The SIG is useful in urban planning.
It is helpful when doing diagnostics.
But we must also understand that it has certain limits.
The limits are that the machine can only perform analyses based on the figures we've provided.
If your figures are false, if the figures are truncated, the analyses will be false and truncated.
That is the first thing.
The second is that in order for a SIG to work, it needs data.
Data is extremely difficult to obtain.
And data is extremely difficult to update.
If we use as an example the African city, we've seen how cities change very rapidly.
It's also necessary that this data can take into account all these changes in a very clear manner, very precise and very quick.
In summary, there is no point in having a machine which spins on its own.
We must feed it, and feed it regularly.
And it is because of this that we've seen, in a fair number of cities, a stage, a project put in place according to a SIG, which ends up without the resources needed to keep it up to date.
If the resources aren't there to update it, your SIG will quickly become obsolete, and will serve no purpose.
So it is preferable to have, rather than an encyclopedic knowledge of a territory, only a few indicators, but indicators which are always kept current.
So this is the power of the SIG, that we can be at once encyclopedic, but can only use certain elements, and it is clearly preferable, logical, to use only those elements which are chosen in a very clear manner, as those indicators we choose to put in place, updating the data to which these indicators refer.
