Welcome to our last week of the Planning and Design for Sanitation course.
Congratulations!
You've made it to the end of an intensive five weeks and have hopefully learned a lot about the challenges and some possible solutions to urban sanitation.
Let's do a quick review of the past few weeks.
In Week 1, we started off with an overview of the multi-level challenges of urban sanitation and presented two planning approaches.
In Week 2, we introduced some fundamental concepts of environmental sanitation, the different waste and resource products, the sanitation value chain, the five functional groups that make up the sanitation system, and we explained the sanitation technologies for the user interface, collection, and storage and transport.
In Week 3, we introduced different sanitation systems from the simple single pit system to the centralized treatment systems.
We also learned about the more sophisticated treatment technologies, as well as possibilities for the use of end products.
After these two weeks, you should have gained a better understanding of the different systems and technologies that are available and feasable in urban settings.
Week 4 brought you three different case studies at different scales, from the small town Nepali example to the urban neighborhood example from Erdos, China.
And finally, the successful sanitation sector development program in Indonesia that has managed to scale up to a nationally anchored and funded program, using realistic and funded city sanitation plans.
We've highlighted the different urban contexts from the planned city areas to the peri-urban interface and presented two planning frameworks, which seek to structure and guide sanitation planning and programming at city-wide level.
Firstly, Sanitation 21, dealing with the entire city and at the neighborhood and community level through CLUES.
We highlighted the importance of creating or working towards an enabling environment regarding institutions, finance, and legal issues.
Our focus has been on affordable and context specific solutions within the sanitation value chain.
Firstly, the user interface.
The most visible and direct part of a sanitation facility that has a lot to do with the functionality, attractiveness, and easiness to clean, be it a dry, a source separating, pour flush, or system flush toilet.
This is an area that is seeing a lot of renewed interest in people-centered design, new materials, and toilet designs, like the mobile pedestal toilet using small container based solution, shown on the bottom left from Ghana.
Second, the storage and containment of human waste, from single and double pit technologies to water-based anaerobic technologies, like the septic tank, or the biogas reactor.
Issues to be considered are treatment efficiency, space needed, and the reliance on the fragmented
Mason based supply chain, which is still the expensive main mode of construction of onsite solutions.
Third, the conveyance and transport of wastes.
The card game shown here, shows some of the great variety of motorized emptying vehicles out there that safely collect and transport fecal sludge to a treatment station for further processing.
For many, if not most, low-income country cities this will continue to be the modus operandi in the decades to come.
Fourth, the treatment technologies, which feature a mosaic of options ranging from anaerobic, aerobic, for liquid solid separation, for the removal of grit and grease, for the stabilization of sludge, the polishing effluent, etcetera.
This is certainly the biggest gap in the sanitation supply chain, as most waste water and sludge worldwide still ends up untreated in the environment.
There's a need to create more capacities to plan, build, and run treatment plants in a sustainable manner.
And lastly, the use or disposal of treated waste.
An area of urban sanitation that is gaining traction in the recent past.
We have highlighted some of the examples for the safe disposal of wastes without harm for the environment and value added safe use of process sanitation products for irrigation, fertilizer, soil conditioner, or energy generation.
And finally, we have introduced the universal theme and guiding concept of the enabling environments.
Governments need to create an enabling environment for everyone to have access to improve sanitation.
The enabling environment includes government support, the legal framework, institutional arrangements, skills and capacities, financial arrangements, and, last but not least, the socio-cultural acceptance.
We have also highlighted that the absence of skills, capacities, and the appropriate institutions can severely hamper the proper planning and implementation, particularly in low-income, urban settings.
At the end of this course,
I would like to thank our guest lecturers,
Jonathan Parkinson and Isabel Blackett.
And our colleagues at Eawag Sandec who've been constantly working behind the scene to make this course run smoothly.
Thanks to Fabian Suter, Lea Zaretti, and Daniel Kroiss.
Our thanks also goes to the
EPFL MOOC team,
Gwenael Bocquet, Patrick Jermann,
Nicolas Peslerbe, and Jeremy Riedar of the Center for Digital Education, who've provided tremendous support in putting this course together.
The next course, in our WASH series in 2015 will be on solid waste management in developing countries and this will be directed by my colleague, Dr. Christian Zurbruegg.
Thanks a lot.
I hope you enjoyed our course and I look forward to hearing from you again.
Bye bye.
