Welcome back to the course.
So far you have seen three blocks.
In the first block, we defined smart cities then in the second block, we talked about smart urban energy systems and in the previous block we talked about smart urban transportation systems.
In the next two blocks or weeks we will talk about the transition to smart cities and the challenges this transition raises.
In order to do that, let me first, in one slide, conceptualize what transition is for us and what it is from a system's perspective.
So the way we look at transition is by defining sort of two dimensions two boundaries, on the one hand, technology changes, and on the other hand institutions change and institutions are the rules if the game.
And the city as a socio-technical system evolves as a result of interaction of technology and institutional change and of course the driver the ultimate drivers of this change are the actors.
They take up the technology, they play under particular rules and they create the dynamics of the whole socio-technical system.
Now, this leads to particular services, the actors produce services, and these services determine actually the performance of an urban infrastructure system.
Now, this MOOC is about smart cities, and we have already insisted about the role that digitalization plays in this.
And digitalization is extremely pervasive in that it affects technological change, it affects the institutional change and it affects the way the actors behave.
And so, digitalization becomes a new driver of the transition of socio-technical systems.
In the first block, and then applied to the second, to energy and transportation systems, we have come up with this distinction into three layers.
We have said that the smart city is about an infrastructure layer a digital or data layer, and a services layer.
And again the services affect the way the city performs ultimately.
So, the next two weeks are structured as follows.
First we will talk about transition, and Muhammad will start out by talking about the transition of socio-technical systems in general, then I will come back and talk about the transition of the digital, of the data layer and this will be illustrated by a series of interviews from experts.
In week five, we will talk in particular about challenges.
First the challenges on the services layer, then the challenges on the infrastructure layer, and then we will bring all this together an talk about what this means for managers.
Finally we will conclude and put all that into a context of policy recommendations, so stay tuned.
