Hello and welcome back to the course.
My name is Mohamad Razaghi,
I'm a researcher at EPFL and in this session I would like to share our approach towards transition to smart cities with you.
My core argument in this session is that in socio-technical systems which cities are of course great examples of such systems,
We are dealing with complexity.
And that, to manage and govern the transition process in such complex context, three key considerations are vital.
First to have a Holistic approach, second to have a long term perspective, and third to be flexible in managing the process of transition.
Let me start with the notion of complexity in socio-technical systems and what does that mean.
As you know, feedback loops are essential elements when we are talking about systems.
In socio-technical systems, the feedback loops are present at the technical. the social. and what we call the socio-technical levels.
In the technical level, we have feedback loops both inside and across different sub-systems.
Let's for example think of the transportation or the energy systems.
As an example of feedback loops inside these technical systems you can for example imagine how changes in the rooting, or the roots of the bus systems will have impact on the demand for the metro or the light rail system in the city. 
As an example of feedback loops across different technical systems you can think for an example, the impact of introducing electric buses in the transportation network and the effects that it would have on the demand on the electricity and the energy infrastructure in the city.
Feedback loops are also exist in the social level, as we call that.
For example, between the economy and the social sub-systems between the economic and the political sub-systems and so on and so forth, so you can think of that between the economy and the environment and so on.
But also, the feedback loops exist in the overall socio-technical system and this is what is really important for us when talking about transition towards the smart cities.
For example, let me give you an example of a new subsidies scheme on public transportation tariffs.
This new tariff system can be seen as an economic decision.
But, introducing this change can have very profound impacts on all the other sub-systems as well such as putting more pressure on the transportation infrastructure due to the increasing demand for public transportation services by the citizens.
Now the service is cheaper, so the demand might go higher.
Also, the availability of more affordable public transportation in the city, might affect the citizen's choice of place for living.
For example, you can imagine that those groups in the city that are less advantaged, compared to the other ones might decide to move to the outer side of the city where the housing is more affordable while they can still commune to the city center and access to their jobs thanks to the availability of these cheap public transpiration tariff scheme that is already introduced in the system.
This can have the significant impact on the social dimensions of life in the city as well, for example you can imagine how it can result in deeper social segregation between different neighborhood in the city, because not anymore, all the groups of the citizens are living in one place, someone living in one neighborhood, the other ones are living in other neighborhoods, which are more advantaged probably, or even on the political dimension of, you know governance and management of the city, for example you can imagine how this new tariff system can help the current administration to win the next election, probably, because this new tariff system would be very visible to the eyes of the citizens, while benefiting from that tariff.
This simple example already shows the three important characteristics in socio-technical system which result in complexity.
Namely, the inter-dependency, which means that a change or the ultimate performance of one sub-system in the broader socio-technical system will have impacts on the performance of other sub-systems as well, and ultimately this is the combination of the performance of all these sub-systems which will result in the performance of the overall system and each of them in isolation.
The second important point here is the past dependency which means that every change or decision in a socio-technical system is dependent on the changes that occurred on the system in the previous stages, which often take quite some time until their effects become fully utilized in this system and are observable and become tangible for the citizens and the decision-makers, of course.
And last but not least, we are talking about irreversibility.
Irreversibility means that we cannot just undo the impact of the decisions that we made and the changes that we introduced in the socio-technical systems because the impacts of the change in one sub-system is affecting many other sub-systems as well, and often over a very long period of time, which makes it almost impossible to redo the effects that one change or one decision has in the socio-technical system.
Let us now discuss what are the implications of of these important features of socio-technical systems for management and governance of the transition towards the smart city.
The interdependence here among different sub-systems offer socio-technical system call for adopting a Holistic and quite often a multidisciplinary approach, then managing the transition process towards the smart cities.
Indeed, because introducing changes in one infrastructure will influence on and will be influenced by changes in other sub-systems of our broader socio-technical system, we have to have a Holistic approach in managing the different elements of the transition process towards the smart cities.
By adopting a holistic approach,
I mean that we have to consider technological, economic, social political, institutional and also very importantly environmental considerations.
In a holistic fashion, and not just in isolation from each other.
Then, we are trying to manage the process of transition towards the smart cities.
Without such a Holistic approach, new initiatives in complex socio-technical systems. like the smart cities often fail, or even result in adverse effects that we don't even foresee them in advance and will distort the performance of the system, potentially.
The past dependency of changes in socio-technical systems calls for adopting a long term perspective in management and governance of transition towards the smart cities.
Let me benefit from S curve innovation to elaborate on this point.
The S curve innovation, which is the result of a lot of empirical research shows us that the performance or progress of introducing an innovation, which can be technical or institutional is dependent on time.
But the relationship between the time and the progress of an innovation is not a linear relation.
Indeed as you can see in this graph, innovations often take quite some significant time to be developed, until they reach a point where we can see a rapid progress in terms of their performance gains.
This is this rapid growth that you can see in the graph.
And after this rapid growth phase innovations often enter a period of relatively stable progress, when their performance does not significantly change over time anymore.
This means that when a new innovation, being technological, or institutional, is introduced in a city to help the city move toward becoming more smart a relatively light period of time will be required until the expected performance from this innovation can be utilized, and an important point here is that, the different innovations have their own different S curves as well, for an example the technological innovations we can look at the rat care for an example in this graph, often reach to their maximum progress in a shorter period of time that when you compare it with social or institutional innovations, which you can think of them as yellow or the green curves here.
But, as we discussed before transition in socio-technical systems is not the result of changes in one single sub-system but is indeed the result of a series of changes in these interdependent sub-systems after broader socio-technical system.
So, we need even longer times until all the introduced changes in the system reach to their expected performance level the technological innovations, the social innovations the financial innovations, and so on, and so forth.
And this implies that without the long term perspective introducing new initiatives in the city often result in failure.
The irreversibility of changes in the socio-technical systems is one of the main reason we need to adopt a flexible approach in management and governance of transition towards the smart cities.
Innovations such as the ones that we have already discussed in the smart energy, and the smart transportation blocks can introduce significant changes in established infrastructure systems and hopefully they can also improve the performance of the systems.
But, unfortunately innovations often fail, and the rate of failure among innovations in socio-technical systems is even higher, something around 90%.
As you can see, in this simplified diagram only few innovations would
eventually become a part of the existing socio-technical systems, while most of the others fail in different stages of their life-cycle.
This can be seen, for example in the case of different innovations to realize the idea of driver-less vehicles, or the different renewable energy technologies, where only one or very few often existing technologies will ultimately become the dominant technology in the sector, and this is indeed the battle the different companies are trying to win at this stage of transition towards the smart cities.
Because most of the innovations are doomed to failure, unfortunately and because all decision and changes in socio-technical systems are not easily reversible, it is very important that we try to keep all the options that are available as long as possible that we can, and to avoid becoming locked in premature technologies that might prove to be failures in a few years.
This is even more important when we consider that not all innovations can affect an infrastructure that are necessarily generated in the same sector, like you know, think of what happened in the battery technology, which has starter in the energy sector but now has disrupted impacts in the transportation infrastructure, thanks to the introduction of the electric vehicles.
Now, let me conclude this session by using a simple diagram, which
I call the "Transition Triangle".p
As we discussed in this session, it is very important to adopt a Holistic approach in management and governance of transition towards the smart cities, considering technological, economic, social political, and environmental dimensions of any change that is going to be introduced in the city towards becoming more smart.
We also have to have a long term perspective in managing the transition towards the smart cities, because we are dealing with different kinds of past dependencies in the system what we already see in the S curve of innovation.
And last, but not least, we have to keep as much flexibility as possible when managing a transition process towards the smarter cities, to effectively deal with the irreversible nature of the changes that are introduced in the socio-technical systems.
But, following these guidelines is easier said than done in practice.
For example, it looks quite paradoxical, you know at the first glance at least, to have a long term perspective while staying flexible at the same time.
And this is why the next sessions of this MOOC we'll try to get into more details on how we can manage and govern the process of transition towards the smart cities understood as complex socio-technical systems.
So, stay tuned.
