Welcome back.
In this session we look at the crucial role that the data layer is playing in the transition to smart cities.
We do this in 3 steps:
First I will talk about why the data layer is so crucial then I will try to identify what the data layer is exactly about.
Thirdly we will raise a series of questions that all need to be addressed if we want to make the transition to smart cities a success.
Getting the data layer, the digital layer right is an important precondition for performing smart city services.
We have seen that in the previous session when Mohammed talked about path dependency. Graphically this can be represented something like this. Over time services are being rolled out which contribute to more performing urban infrastructure systems.
Getting the data layer right is a precondition for having the services function and being able to be rolled out.
This is a typical path dependency problem.
What is this data or digital layer exactly?
In the first block, you remember, when we talked about networks we identified 3 layers. We had a physical telecommunication infrastructure, wired or wireless.
Then we had networks; typically the internet and then we had the identification and exchange of data; typically the World Wide Web.
In the context of a smart city what is particularly important for the data layer is this connection of the devices to each other; the internet of things as we have also said.
This requires technical interoperability and standards so that actually all the data generating devices can be connected to each other.
The second element that is crucial for this digital or data layer is the fact that the data can be identified and accessed and exchanged as a result of that.
This is mainly a question of norms and regulation whereby access rules are defined, locations are identified and accessibility is granted.
From here we can raise a series of questions. Those are all the questions that are crucial for the digital layer to function properly.
Let's start with the first question.
I already mentioned before;
It's this question of standards.
It is not -- The digital layer cannot function properly if the devices that generate the data cannot be connected to each other.
This is typically a question of standards. The second question is a question of ownership of the data. This is a question that somehow needs to be decided so that the data layer can function properly.
Who owns the data? Is it the telecom operator that transports them?
Is it the owner of the devices that generates them?
Is it the individual from whose house these data actually come?
Is it the one who buys the data?
This question of ownership also needs to be clarified for the data layer to function properly.
The third question is the question of accessibility of data.
What good is it to have data if they are not accessible?
Who has access to this data?
Are these data openly accessible; something that today is called open data.
Are they restricted to some users?
Are they only accessible to the highest bidder? Those are -- or are they just accessible to the ones who have generated it and to whom he wants to sell it?
These are the kind of questions that also need to be decided.
The fourth question is a standard question but it's the question about the security and the privacy of the data. If data are not secure and if privacy is not guaranteed then the data layer may simply not function. The fifth question is the one about the pricing of the data. Data generation has a price. Those are devices; that there is a cost. The question is what is the price of the data?
Should they be given for free and in which case, who pays actually the real cost that the data have?
Maybe it's the customers who give their own data and somebody makes money with them.
It's really a matter of what is a good pricing policy about data?
These question have to be clarified as well.
Then the sixth question is about the reliability of data.
What good is it to have data if you cannot rely upon them to provide good services; if they are wrong, false, manipulated; questions like this.
Then the seventh question may be a little bit more theoretical question but it's the question about the location of the data.
Where are these data platforms?
Are they within the firms?
Are they within the city?
Are they in a country?
Are they in the global cloud?
This is a technical question, an economic question but can also be a political question.
Okay so basically we have 2 issues here:
One is an issue of standards and ideally the standards are set by the industry but if the industry is not capable of setting the standards then it may also become a regulatory question; like most of the other questions are actually regulatory questions.
Those are decision that need to be made about the ownership, about the privacy, about the location and that is actually regulation that decides on these things.
In this session we saw why the data layer is so crucial.
What it is about and the main questions that you need to ask to get the data layer right.
Stay tuned.
