So, I'm Boi Faltings. 
I'm professor of artificial intelligence at the EPFL, and I would speak to you about concept of smart cities and the use of artificial intelligence in that area. 
So, one of the big features of smart cities is that we will adjust parameters, we will control things to sit as well being based on measurements of what actually happens, what is the constraint of a city.
So naturally, smart cities will collect a lot of data. 
Data in fact is at the heart of the concept of smart cities, and so the question is, how do we gather this data and what do we do with it?
So, when we gather data, clearly there's a lot of things that can be done, for example, if we systematically analyze traffic data, we can find out where do we have a lot of traffic jams, are there roads that are may be underutilized, could we somehow channel traffic differently so that we have less congestion. 
Could we maybe offer incentives for people drive at different times,
And all these things have been done and they are very profitable for the citizens and we can think of extending this.
We could measure more data, we could measure more about what is happening in the city and observe anomalies, and those anomalies could be corrected.
And so this is actually a very healthy development and it's going on already as we speak. 
But the real interest in the smart city, is not to just make small improvements, but may be to have a permanent control loop.
That is, where we observe what's happening, and we adjust, we make changes, and making changes is not easy just based on data because the difficulty is that we only have data about what is happening currently. 
So, we cannot tell from the fact that drivers produce traffic jams in certain situations, what will happen if somehow flagged them to take different routes or if we  scheduled the traffic lights differently?
Well, you know, the data doesn't tell us this, so we cannot make that inference directly.
On the other hand, it is possible to do this by building simulations.
And so, the next step in big data, and this is what actively being researched now, is to actually use it to build models. 
So in the case of traffic again, we would build models of driver behaviors, how the drivers react including their emotions.
They get upset, they get frustrated, you know, and so we can build increasingly sophisticated models based on the data that we can gather today, based on those observations, and then with both models we can simulate what will happen when we make changes and that is actually a whole new game because now we can actually make more intelligent changes.
Not just thinking what might be a good solution but actually having a pretty good prediction of what would be a good solution. 
And then the next step that will come afterwards is to make the city really intelligent. 
That is, to not leave this change to people, but to automate this, and AI can really do this quite nicely. we have developed lots of techniques for automated planning, for automated configuration for optimizing these kinds of situations. 
So once we have the data, once we have those models, actually Artificial Intelligence systems can also find us better solutions. 
So, I think there is a bright future here.
The more they data we collect, the more accurate this data is, the better we can automatically act and we can actually improve everybody's life, and I think it will be quite important given that we have a high density of people in cities, it's quite a challenge to make life nice for them. 
Now, given all this, there are still lots of difficulties to overcome and the biggest difficulty really, is that data is biased. 
Most of the data we collect today is collected opportunistically. 
That is, we take what we get, right.
We have sensors for traffic, we have sensors at traffic lights so we kind of know how many cars are waiting at certain one of these lights, so while that data is being sensed, well, we might as well collect it. 
But we don't have data about roads.
You know, we don't measure traffic on all the streets systematically, so we have a lot of holes in there. 
And these holes actually are quite important because they mean that the models are not quite as accurate
 as we would like them to be. 
So, take another example which is measuring pollution. 
Air pollution kills according to an estimate of the World Health organization, about 7 million people every year. 
Compare that to traffic accidents which the same organization estimates to be responsible for 1.25 million deaths.
So you see that air pollution actually is a much bigger problem. 
Now, we could help citizens if we could provide them
with some information in real time because air pollution that actually  kills people, is not the pollution that you see when it's a bit fogy, or, you know, the diesel exhaust that comes out in front of you. 
These big particles actually get ejected by your lungs right away.
The thing that really kills people are things that you don't see, gases that you don't smell like carbon monoxide or NO2 are fine particles that stay in your lungs and actually go into your bloodstreams, these are things that you need to measure. 
You cannot just see them, and in fact, it would be nice, if the citizens could have access to that data in real time.
I could avoid, for example, going jogging on a road that's very polluted and actually absorbing a very large quantity of this pollution, and I could do it may be at another time or in another place. 
Now for a long time it was thought that pollution across the city was relatively constant, so you know, you could just have one measuring point and it would work and it would sort of, cover the whole city. 
Today, people have developed better sensors and in fact, there are  a lot of small sensors available.
Now, I have some pictures here, for example, there's this, you know, there's a company called Plume Labs that make really small sensors like this that you could attach to your back pack, and you could walk around with them. 
They're not supper accurate though
I must say. 
Then there's  another generation of laser based sensors, so this is a sensor that is very popular in China called the Laser Egg.
And they are quite cheap, and they're quite accurate. 
People can now measure this air pollution, and people have walked around, for example, this is the map of the city of Zurich.
So people have walked around with little bit more accurate sensors than this, actually, with the whole back pack full of sensors in the city of Zurich and they kind of measured more fine-grained how the pollution looks. 
And you can see that, you have very high pollution along certain main roads, and then, as you go away, sometimes within the space of 100 meters, the pollution is just half, or sometimes even down to a quarter.
So, they are pretty big differences, and if I can choose, well, I could go to places where there's less pollution, right, or at least if I have a choice to my exercise or my bike riding. 
In fact, a colleague of mine in Zurich has produced an App that allows you to minimize your pollution exposure, so you choose a bike route that minimizes your pollution exposure. 
But, these things are all experimental.
So for the moment, what we are really lacking is the data and to have the data systematically. 
The sensors are now becoming available but, you know, we would have to put up a lot more of them and we have to put them up all over the city in order to really provide this kind of map to the citizens. 
And so, how could this work?
One way of course, is that the city puts up all the sensors.
So the city would buy hundreds of them may be, and they would ring on your door and they would say 
"Well, we should put a sensor in your backyard because that's a good position. 
And so, could you please let us in?
And by the way, we come by every month to do the maintenance and make sure that it works."
So that's obviously not the greatest model. 
So, we can think of new ways of doing this, and one new way that we have been promoting a lot is crowd sensing. 
Which means that, just like people can buy solar panels today, and actually sell the electricity back, people could buy sensors and sell the data, right? 
And that way, may be even lot's of people would be quite motivated to have these sensors close to their home because it would give them some information about the pollution they're currently exposed to, but also if they sell this data, well they could recover the cost of the sensor, so.
This would probably give quite a movement and  it could also support a little bit more democratic use of this data because everybody could contribute and everybody could see the effect.
There would be no trust issue, in the sense that, people would have to trust that the government does not hide any important pollution from them. 
So, I think it's really the way to go. 
Now of course if I tell you, 
"I will pay you for data,"
Well, you'll say, "Great, you know, 
I don't even have to buy the sensor,
I will get a random number generator and I will feed in some data, so we have to think carefully about how we pay for data.
And this is one innovation 
I'd like to show you that we have been working on in the lab where we actually have a scheme for rewarding such that people who have no extra data to report don't get any reward. 
And the way it woks is that, you have your space, so this would be a part of a city, for example. 
Actually, this was a real experiment we did, with data from the City of Strasbourg in France. 
So these are all measuring points, the red crosses you can see here , and let's say we have participants here who says, 
"Okay, I have this data to sell you."
And so it provides, this participant provides us with some kind of reading of sensors, supposedly. 
Then what we do is we identify in the neighborhood other sensors that have give us data that have  to be correlated to this, right, at least the fluctuations will be correlating and so, this is what we call peers. 
And we will compare this participant report to the peer reports, right, and all that we'll require is that it should be more closely correlated to the peer reports than to overall average that we find in the rest of the city. 
And it turns out that this correlation actually is enough to have a scheme so that somebody who has no data to report or who just reports randomly, can expect exactly no revenue and everybody who actually accurate data and the more accurate, the better, actually can expect a higher revenue. 
So we have here for these points
that you see, we have an image here that show you all the different census, they were 
116 of them of the stimulation here and so these are actual data that was measured in the City of Strasbourg where we made a simulation of whether you would report correctly or not and how it would be rewarded, and you can see here that census would report, honestly, this would be the blue curve, right.
They always get a positive payoff. 
Whereas those that report randomly, so these red curves here, they often get negative payoffs. 
Note, average actually the payoff is pretty much exactly zero. 
And also every census, every single one of them, gets a higher payoff and a significantly higher payoff by reporting truthfully, and reporting accurately. 
So we think this scheme really will enable a smart city to actually have all the data and to make it available to citizens and to make it available for decisions, for example, 
If we discover that pollution is too high on certain roads, then maybe we will run the buses somewhere else, maybe we will stop car traffic into the city.
So all these measures can be coupled to a real time measurement rather than, well, some bureaucratic decisions or decisions that maybe people won't support. 
I think if we have this kind of democratic movement where everybody can contribute their data.
So if they think that my area is too polluted and there are too many cars going through, well, put up more census and you will show this to the city and in fact, you can also expect some measures to be taken if pollution is really too high.
So, we think that could be a new model and we're actually looking together with this company at Beijing, that makes sense whether we can work this out in the near future.
All these things take time as you can imagine but I hope that maybe we can inspire you as well, to think of some of these techniques.
Thank you very much for listening and I wish you a good day. 
