This is a general cutaway of the Space Shuttle.
This is the habitable compartment, the forward portion with the flight deck, and the mid-deck, and we'll detail these later.
Now, we see the rest of the Orbiter with the payload bay; the payload bay doors open.
The afts you have the parts containing the fuel for the reaction control system, the orbiter maneuvering system.
You see that the wing in this cutaway is a pretty standard, aeronautical structure in aluminium of course, covered with thermal protection tiles, but inside is pretty much a classical, aeronautical construction.
Here you have some details of the standard habitable compartments with the flight deck, the mid deck, and the airlock.
And there was a floor on the flight deck which you see here, and there was access from the flight deck to the mid deck or mid deck to flight deck through square holes that were in the back of the commander's and the pilot's seats.
The lower deck wasn't habitable.
There was an access to it to change the LOH cartridges for the removal of the carbon dioxide but it wasn't really a habitable area so we had a flight deck, a mid deck, and an airlock that were habitable.
That's a nice overall view of the flight deck.
You have the seats for the commander and the pilot here, the instrument panel in the front, and I was mentioning the holes giving access to the mid deck for the flight deck there is one here, there was another one behind the pilot seats.
Of interest are also the windows, obviously, you have the front windows pretty much like in an airliner, but you had overhead windows, two pretty large overhead windows, square in shape, on top of the aft flight deck.
And you had these aft windows, allowing the crew to see what was happening, in the payload bay there were two of them.
A nicer night view of the forward flight deck and this is the configuration of the instrument panel after the modification that was done about in the year 2000 for all four
Space Shuttle Orbiters.
The instrument panel was modified to a glass cockpit-type, pretty much like the modern airliners at the time.
This is a view of the mid deck, it's kind of bare view of the mid deck.
It doesn't have a lot of equipment.
Of course, you see the seat here, but it was only there for the ascent to space for up to three crew members.
You had four in the flight deck, and up to three in the mid deck for up to seven crew members.
In the forward part of the mid deck, you had lockers, crew lockers, where the food, with the tools, clothing and so on, all of the equipment was basically in these lockers.
Also, some lockers in the rear part of the mid deck.
Now, on the port side of the mid deck which you see here, you have the food preparation station and from where this picture was taken, pretty much was the waste collection system that I'll talk about afterwards.
But you see a ladder here, allowing access from the mid deck to the flight deck, but this if for the simulator on the ground.
In gravity, you have to use the ladder it's basically just for moving yourself from a compartment to the other one, without using the ladder, obviously.
Food preparation on the Shuttle: basically the food was taken in dehydrated form, and food preparation in the kitchen, in a way, was a re-hydration station which you have here.
You could select injection of a certain volume of water, either hot water or cold water, depending on whether you wanted to make
Beef Stroganoff or orange juice, and there was a heater at the bottom here so you can re-heat the food, and this is basically the kitchen.
The food was all prepared and cooked in the kitchen in Houston and taken on board, mainly in a dehydrated form.
Waste collection system: you had to have one, and is basically a commode, pretty much like a commode of waste collection system, or a bathroom, or toilet, here on surface of planet Earth.
Here you have two handles that you had to lift and then raise, and then put on your thighs so that you would stay on the commode during the operation.
And you you had to follow very strictly the procedure which was here, on your right-hand side, in order to do the proper sequencing of the opening and closing of the valves; you had to be very rigorous about that.
But it worked fine.
This is the Shuttle airlock, obviously another habitable area, although it was inhabited only a short time when there was space walking in order to go out and come back in.
Obviously, the airlock, can be either under normal cabin pressure or after closing the inner door of the airlock, you can evacuate it, when it's completely under vacuum you can open the outer door and start your space walk, after, of course, attaching your safety tether.
On the right hand side you see a view of the airlock pretty much from the outer hatch
--this is the inner hatch-- giving access to the mid deck.
You can see the lockers in the background here.
You have two stations here, allowing for the two space suits that were located, one was here, the other one, there.
From this control system, you could change the pressure in the airlock evacuated and do some other adjustments in the airlock.
On the left hand side, you have two crew members that have taken place in this airlock after donning the spacesuits.
You see that it's quite small, and you see that during the preparation of the airlock we have an umbilical attached to the space suit that was providing oxygen on one hand and electrical power to the space suits, although we would not use these resources while in the airlock; the umbilical was detached prior to exiting the airlock.
