The Space Shuttle program:
This video will be mainly about the first flight STS-1, in April, 1981, but let me go quickly through the overall program.
We had the Approach and Landing Test in 1977, we talked about that before, in the previous video.
Then we had OFTs, for Orbital Flight Tests.
Tests of the system, STS-1, the first flight, until STS-4, between April 1981 and 1982.
Then we had the operational phase
STS-5, in 1982, through STS-135,
135 flights total, in 2011.
Now, the reason why I talked about the Shuttle quite a lot in this course, is that it was a major undertaking.
In the first program it was a really difficult effort from NASA and the aerospace industry in the US, to bring together in an operational status a winged spacecraft nearly totally reusable.
It allowed also a lot of people to go into space, it allowed the Hubble program, it made also the Space Station assembly possible, so it was really a major undertaking.
I had also the privilege, in this section here, on the 46th shuttle flight, and the the 61st and then 75th, and then flight number 103, to be on board.
So my knowledge of the shuttle, from an operation point of view, is quite extensive.
And again, it's a major program;
I want to share with you some of its capabilities, performance, and all of what it offered to the Space Exploration program.
Here we have the crew of STS-1, the crew selected for the very first shuttle flight.
It was rather amazing that a completely new spacecraft, compared with what it had been operated before; it was going to be flown for the first time, with a crew on board.
It was definitely a very critical mission, very dangerous also, because of the novelty of the Shuttle architecture and the overall operational scenario, it was completely different from what we had before; with the external tank, solid rocket boosters, and our asymmetrically located orbiter.
It was really a very new configuration vs. everything that had been flown before which was basically of cylindrical symmetry.
All the rockets are cylindrical in their symmetry.
These are John Young and Bob Crippen.
John Young was a very experienced astronaut; he had flown on the Gemini Program two times, and in the Apollo Program also.
He was the Commander of Apollo 16.
And he was the Commander of this first flight of the Space Shuttle, together with Bob Crippen; and he flew again, John Young, on the 9th Shuttle flight, which was also the first flight of the European Spacelab.
So this is the crew of STS-1.
Now, obviously, before the first flight, it was a lot of preparation, testing of all the components, including the software of the Space Shuttle.
This is a winged spacecraft, but its flyby wire system, all of the inputs of the crew, on the controls, are translated by computers into movement of the area surfaces, or faring of the thrusters, so, there was, for the first time, a lot of software involved.
A lot of training also.
This is John Young and Bob Crippen.
John Young is on the commander seat, on the left side, and Bob Crippen, on the pilot seat, on the right side.
And you see the complexity of the cockpit of the Space Shuttle, this is in the simulator, but it is simulating exactly the geometry and all of the features of the cockpit.
And for this first flight, and for the whole OFT,
Orbital Flight Test, the crew was wearing special suits, and they had ejection seats also, in case there was a problem during the initial part of the ascent to orbit; they had the possibility of ejecting.
The ejection seats were removed from STS-5 on; for the whole operational flight of the Shuttle Program, we had normal crew escape capability.
STS-1--this is the Shuttle Columbia on the launch pad at the Kennedy Space Center, shortly before the planned lift-off.
Lift-off on April, the 12th, 1981: interestingly enough, this was exactly
20 years after the flight of Gagarin.
It was not planned this way: in fact, the first flight of Columbia was planned a few days earlier but it was delayed because of a technical program, and it happened that it just occurred on the 20th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin's flight.
Everything went fine for the ascent to orbit, and here we are on orbit.
John Young and Bob Crippen commanded payload bay doors in the open position, and there were two windows in the back of the Shuttle cockpit that allowed the crew to see what was occurring at payload bay.
And to the surprise, and I must say, their concern, you see that there were some thermal protection tiles that were missing in the aft pod.
As mentioned before, this is is not an area that it has a lot of heat during the re-entry, but it was still a concern.
The question was, "Do we have any thermal protection tiles on the bottom of the Orbiter, the black tiles, that were missing also?"
So, there was really some concern and there was no way to verify whether we had any missing tiles at the bottom, so we were just hoping that things would be OK for the re-entry.
Things went fine for the re-entry thanks God! and we have here a short video of the final approach to land at Edwards or Dryden Research Center in California.
The landing was going to be on the dried lakebed not on the runaway, because the dried lakebed is very large, and there was also the possibility to be a little bit short, maybe a little bit long, there was a lot of forgiveness there, landing on the lakebed.
What you'll see, the final approach on the steep glide slope, then you see the pre-flare, getting to the shallow glide slope and ready to belate deployment of the landing gear; then the touchdown on the lakebed.
It's quite a nice video.
There was a lot of emotion at that time.
That was the first time that the spaceship was going to land on a runway.
So it was a first and quite a remarkable accomplishment by NASA, the aerospace industry, and the whole team that had prepared the mission and supported the mission, and obviously, by the crew,
John Young and Bob Crippen.
And here we see, post-landing,
John, the commander, and Bob Crippen;
John is already here, he's come down the stairs and this is the pilot, Crippen, coming down the stairs.
There was a lot of emotions at that time.
Again, it was the first in the space program.
You see some details of the orbiter that I'd like to point at: you see the detail of the tiles, the black tiles, that are designed for protecting the orbiter against the highest heat during the re-entry.
You see all the white tiles here.
And in the front of the fuselage, you see some of the reaction control system nozzles.
These are nozzles of the thrusters that allow a change in the orientation or attitude of the orbiter during the orbit phase, and also, take out the toxs during the re-entry.
