The Space Shuttle was developed in the US, already at the end of the Apollo program, so before 1972.
The last Apollo program flight was Apollo 17, December 1972, but before that time already, the US government and NASA had in mind to develop, to test, to operate a winged spacecraft, a reusable spacecraft for access to low Earth orbit, and the idea was to launch commercial payloads to use it also for the needs of the Department of Defense and also to do space exploration and utilization, using the same vehicle, that was going to replace basically all of the nonreusable rockets that had been used until that time.
Several concepts were looked at for the design of the Space Shuttle in the early 70s.
It was really a dream for aerospace engineers because they were started with nearly a blank sheet and they had to think about the geometry of it.
Initially, the idea was a fully reusable spacecraft, a two-stage spacecraft for access to low Earth orbit.
This is one of the geometries that was thought about; basically here you have the first stage, with the LH2 and LO2, the propellants, cryogenic engines in the back.
And then, the second stage was going to be the orbiter itself.
But you will see in all of the next few drawings the cargo bay, the size of the payload bay or cargo bay was really determined by the Department of Defense.
The plan was to use it for this department, and they had strict requirements in terms of the size and also capability in mass of the content of the payload bay.
This is another concept that was looked at, an alternative approach.
You see again, two stages: here you see, solid rocket boosters that are attached to the second stage, so that was just another concept looked at.
Third concept that was presented: this was the so-called
High Cross Range System.
The Cross Range is the capability to land outside of the plane of the orbit, the initial orbit.
You can imagine if you have a winged spacecraft during the descent in the atmosphere, you can give a back angle, so that you can eventually land pretty far away form the intersection of the plane of the orbit with the Earth, a few hundred miles away from this line.
And this was also a requirement of the Department of Defense; they wanted to have a large cross range in order to give more flexibility for the landing site.
Now, this is an interesting curve: the costs trade-off.
On the horizontal line, you have the developed cost; on the vertical line, the cost per flight.
Now, don't look really at the numbers there, here you have billions of dollars on the horizontal scale, and millions on the vertical scale.
But look more at the shape of the curve: you can spend much more money for development, in order to get spacecraft, in our case that will have relatively low costs per flight.
Typically, the fully reusable spacecraft that it was looked at originally in the Shuttle Program development, was going to induce quite high development cost for a relatively low operation cost, because everything was going to be reusable.
But because of budget limitations, eventually, NASA, the US government had to cut it off at the lower point of the horizontal axis, which mean less development costs but that was going to mean a higher cost per flights, and the final configuration of the Space Shuttle that was chosen was only partially reusable, less development costs, but more costs per flight.
The chosen configuration, let's look at what we have on the right-hand side, the Space Shuttle, with the external tank, the solid rocket boosters on the launch pad just after the faring of the Space Shuttle main engines, and before the solid rocket boosters are ignited.
You have here the Orbiter.
Again, with the large payload bay that was a requirement of the DOD, in the front, you have the cabin for up to seven crew members.
In the back of the Orbiter you have the Space Shuttle main engine,
O2 plus H2, cryogenic engines, there are three of them; and here you have the external tank, containing about 700 tons of liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen, to feed the three
Space Shuttle main engines.
And here you have two SRBs, solid rocket boosters that provide in fact the highest fraction of the thrust for the initial launch all the way to about 2 minutes into the launch where they are fully burned out and they are jettisoned and fall down in the ocean.
They could be recovered by boats, and they are reused on later flights but after quite a lot of refurbishment.
So the Orbiter and the external tank work continuing the ascent to main engine cutt-off which is about 8.5 minutes after lift-off.
Let's look at what we have on the left here: you see the the view from the front, the rear, the top, the bottom, and the side of the Orbiter.
All of the black parts,
TPS, several protection system tiles, that are able to resist the high temperature during the re-entry, obviously because of the configuration during the re-entry or the orientation, which was a high angle of attack, about 40 degrees.
The heating was mainly in the nose of the Orbiter, the leading edge of the wings, and also, of course, the whole bottom of the Orbiter that's why the black parts are in the bottom of the wing, and also, at the nose of fuselage and covering the side of the fuselage up to a certain height.
The white areas were also covered with thermal protection tiles, but not with the same capabilities that the black ones.
Now the idea the of the Space Shuttle was, of course, to come back from orbit, and eventually, come for a soft landing in a runway at the Kennedy Space Center which is also the launch site, in Florida.
And before the final design, it was necessary to test the capability of the spaceship which, in a way, at the end of the mission was becoming a bit lighter, to do a satisfactory approach and landing on the runway.
And this is the so-called approach and landing test that was performed in 1977 at the Dryden Research Center which is a NASA center attached to the Edwards Air force base in California.
And for this, it was the Enterprise
Space Shuttle that it was used which had all of the avionics, and the landing gear, and the guidance navigation system for the final approach, and, of course, the structure of the Orbit, but it did not have the thermal protection tiles.
And also, in the rear of the Enterprise, it didn't have the real cryogenic engines that were not needed, and the pods, this is a pod, containing fuel for the on-orbit maneuvering system.
Was just there, physically, but, of course, there was nothing inside, so the idea was to test only the final approach and landing on the runway at Edwards, or on any runway for that matter.
And we had four crew members who were active in this approach and landing test.
From left to right, we have:
Gordon Fullerton, Fred Haise, who is the only one among the four who had gone in space, in fact on the Apollo 13, and Joe Engle, and Dick Truly.
These were the four crew members assigned to approach-and-landing test of the Space Shuttle Enterprise.
So this was the configuration used for bringing the Space Shuttle Enterprise in relatively high atmosphere, a few kilometers above the Earth surface; and the first tests were done with a captive Enterprise.
There was here, a tail cone, in the back of the Orbiter, in order to reduce the drag, and also bring less turbulence toward the tail, at the so-called Shuttle Carrier Aircraft which is a modified Boeing 747, which belonged to NASA.
So this is a way the Enterprise spaceship was taken in the atmosphere for the approach and landing test.
And here we see the first free flight, again with the tail cone on of the Space Shuttle Enterprise, and the idea was to verify again, the proper alignment on the runway.
Pretty steep glide slope, about 20 degrees, a much larger angle of approach than we have with the commercial airliners, or any military airplane.
This is the final turn towards alignment with the runway and, eventually, we had deployment of the landing gear very late, the idea was to deploy the gear late, so that we didn't have too early the considerable drag that the landing gear was causing.
And then, landing on the runway.
Here we see the configuration of the Enterprise without the tail cone,
NASA decided obviously that we had at some point a test configuration and it worked fine, also.
The angle of approach was just a little bit steeper but here, we just see the detachment of Enterprise from the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft and this all had to be planned properly because there was a certain angle of dive of the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft and there was a generation of lifts on the wings of the Enterprise, and then it could be detached, and it was coming up over the top part of the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft and avoiding contact with the tail.
There were a total of two landings done at the Dryden Research Center with the configuration tail cone off, and this is the very last landing of the Enterprise.
It landed initially on the dried lakebed which is very big, about 25 km in length, but the last landing was done on the runway at Edwards Air Force base, or Dryden Research Center.
And you see here, this is very classical for tested airplanes or tested winged spaceships like this one, it's a probe in order to measure the air data in front of the fuselage.
Obviously, for the Space Shuttle, later Columbia, and the others, we didn't have that probe anymore.
