Hubble Space Telescope servicing missions after the deployment of the orbiting observatory in 1990, on mission 31 there was a total of five servicing missions,
SM1, SM2, SM3A, SM3B and SM4, until May 2009, shortly before the shuttle was retired, and, of course, from the time the Shuttle is no longer in operation it's not possible anymore to go and visit Hubble.
All these servicing missions served the purpose of repairing or improving the telescope and mainly, it was the exchange of components; the telescope had been designed in order to allow exchange of components.
Some components were not planned this way, so we had a little bit of a harder time exchanging them, but most of the components had captive bolts, and it is relatively easy to remove them and put them back-- although obviously, if you work outside, the space suit and the zero-gravity environment-- it's never an easy task.
But, again, the telescope was conceived for servicing on orbit.
This is a cutaway of the telescope so you see what is inside.
This is the so-called optical part, this is the instrument part here, a bit larger in diameter.
You have the primary mirror here,
2.4 m in size.
The secondary mirror is here, and you have the so-called high gain antennas, two of them, allowing the commanding of the telescope via the control room in Greenbelt, Maryland, the Hubble Space Telescope Control Center.
You have the solar arrays providing the electrical power for powering all of the equipment and instrument on board or charging the batteries for the orbital nights, and in this section you have the scientific instrument and most of them are in so-called axial position, but you have a possibility of the instrument in a so-called radial position, including three fine guidance sensors and wide-field camera.
So this is Hubble, and where the intervention could be done on orbit was basically in the instrument section, so this section here.
The solar arrays were replaced a couple of times in the servicing tasks and there was a possibility of doing interventions on the surface of the telescope-- we added thermal protection for magnetometers, for instance.
I was one of seven crew members on the servicing mission one: the main objective of this mission was really to install an optical corrector.
We had a problem with the shape of the primary mirror, so that the pictures obtained with the telescope were not as sharp as expected so we had to install an optical corrector and most of the preparation for this mission was at the end of 1992, and for most of 1993, for a planned launch in December 1993.
And here you see some of the crew members including the commander Dick Covey here and Jeff Hoffman in virtual reality.
As this had never been done before, we had to use virtual reality to see what kind of positioning we're going to have for the crew members to perform certain tasks.
I'm here operating in virtual reality also the robot arm of the Shuttle and this is Ken Bowersox the pilot and Katie Thornton, one of the mission specialists.
Beyond virtual reality, we used, of course, a lot, a pool, to Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama.
You see in the lower left the installation in this training facility of the new wide-field and Planetary Camera number two that was going to replace the one existing that was, of course, affected by the wrong shape of the primary mirror.
And we use really very realistic training tools.
You see there the camera operated by Jeff Hoffman and Story Musgrave in the pool and the real camera during the mission.
You see the similarity between the two, and the idea was really to have very high fidelity training tools in order to avoid surprises on orbit.
The first servicing mission was STS-61; the 61st Shuttle Mission.
We lifted off from Kennedy Space Center at 4:26 in the morning, on the 2nd of December, 1993.
Inbound to Hubble-- it took two days, or 48 hours, to the rendezvous with the telescope, and here we are, close to the orbiting observatory and approaching it very slowly.
We are over the Indian Ocean, and you see the robotic arm that I had the responsibility for as a robot arm operator and flight engineer on board,
I would say, maybe 10 or 20 minutes before the capture of the telescope.
So the Commander, Dick Covey with flying the Shuttle, and coming in a relative orientation and position versus a telescope that we had trained for, and that was adequate for the capture of the telescope with the robot arm.
The capture took place with the robot arm, and you see the end of the robot arm here after the capture on one hand and also the installation of the telescope, on a small platform in the back of the payload bay.
This platform could be rotated in order to orient towards the front of the payload bay, from where we see the telescope here, through the aft windows of the cockpit; orient this area of the telescope where we had to intervene, so it was quite a practical set up.
You see the solar arrays that don't look great.
In fact, we had a plan to exchange them.
We had new solar arrays folded in the payload bay, so in addition to the installation of the optical corrector, exchange the solar arrays was one thing we've got to do and exchange gyroscopes and do a few other repair work on the telescope.
600 km altitude, that was quite high, that was among the highest missions of the Space Shuttle, and quite an incredible view of planet Earth from there.
We performed five spacewalks in order to do the repair work the servicing that was required.
All these spacewalks had been extensively practiced in virtual reality, on one hand, and then in the training pool in Huntsville.
And basically the work on the telescope was done with a combination of EVA or space walking and robotics.
You see here from the workstation of the robotic arm where I'm operating the arm, and with my left hand
I'm using the arm translation hand controller and with my right hand, which is not visible here,
I operate the rotation hand controller of the robot arm.
Basically I was placing my colleagues in a proper position to do the maintenance work required on that particular EVA.
So, again, it was determined that a combination of EVA and robotics is really the best way to do such maintenance on a complex scientific instrument in the space environment.
Space walk, or EVA number 5 out of 5: we are 600 km over Australia, and you have at the end of the robot arm Story Musgrave and Jeff Hoffman at the payload bay, always two people going at the same time for spacewalks.
You see that Story Musgrave has tools here, kind of an open toolbox.
We see here the solar arrays that have been exchanged, but they are still folded against the skin of the telescope-- later they will be deployed-- and on this spacewalk, we went also to the top of the telescope to put thermal protection on magnetometers.
This is on the same space walk: you see the great view that Jeff Hoffman and Story Musgrave had.
They were brought both of them together to the top of the telescope, and this is a view from the top of the telescope to the payload bay, so the rest of the crew was obviously here.
Here you have one of the solar arrays that we brought back.
One of them, the old solar array, we could not fold, and we had to jettison it and leave it in space.
It came down to Earth pretty rapidly because it has a very large surface and low mass, but we could bring back to Earth only one of the old solar arrays.
We had servicing mission 2 in 1997, with the exchange of scientific instruments and other general work on the telescope.
Then servicing mission 3 was planned for the year 2000, but eventually, because there were a lot of tests to be performed, it was divided into two, SM3A and SM3B.
I was privileged to be assigned to 3A.
It was pretty much exactly six years after the first servicing mission that I was a part of, and we lifted off at the end of December 1999.
We had only three spacewalks on this mission.
This is the first spacewalk where we had an exchange of the gyroscopes or rate measurement units on the telescope, and you see the doors have been opened, and the instrument part of the telescope.
Together with Mike Foale, who is interviewed in a "Focus on" in this MOOC,
I went out for the second spacewalk EVA2, for 8 hours and 10 minutes.
On the left-hand side, you see Mike Foale who is on a platform at the end of the robot arm,
I'm here, in the forefront as the so-called free-floater: the free-floater is the one among the two space walkers who is responsible for his displacement without having the privilege of being on the robot arm.
And you see the portable life support system here.
A way to identify a space-walking astronaut are the signs on his or her legs here: on the side of the portable life support system.
I had a little red chevron, and Mike Foale had the large red bands.
So if somebody is suddenly floating away, you know whether it's Mike or Claude because you don't see always their face, and you need to have a way of identifying who that is.
This is the exchange of the main computer of the Hubble.
The purpose of EVA2 was to change that main computer on Hubble, which needed some beef up, and also we installed new fine guidance sensors.
At the end of the spacewalk,
I took some pictures here with a Nikon camera, and you see on the side here the open toolbox with power tools and all of the tools, of course, are secured with a safety tether.
By the way, I also have, if you look again on the left-hand side, a safety tether here.
We do all of these spacewalks with safety tethers except the one that had been performed in the past with the man maneuvering unit.
A little later, on the same spacewalk EVA2, together with Mike Foale we exchanged the fine guidance sensor.
We changed position, with Mike Foale and now at the end of the robot arm and Mike Foale is here climbing the north face of Hubble, and joining me as I am installing a new fine guidance sensor number two.
The old one that was defective has been taken out and installed temporarily on the side of the payload bay.
Later we'll put it in a thermo stabilized container in the payload bay to bring back to Earth.
We are, again, 600 km over Australia; magnificent view.
On Christmas Day, 1999, after all the repairs have been completed successfully, we released Hubble.
It's always a very special view, to see a telescope that you worked on in training for several months very intensely and then you do the repair for only just a few days, but very intense days, and then it's all ready to be released and back into its free orbit and ready to resume scientific observation.
On this mission, we had a problem with the attitude control of the telescope because of the failed gyros so we found a telescope that was not functional, and when we released it on Christmas day it was functional again, so it was a Christmas gift for us to be able to perform this mission, a Christmas gift for the astronomers who had again a functioning telescope.
The following one to the mission 3A that I just described was in March, 2002, and we had new solar arrays installed, small solar arrays which were more efficient than the original ones and also rigid solar arrays versus the old ones which was somewhat flexible.
There was a NICMOS cooling near the infrared camera, and multi-object spectrometer cooling, and advanced camera for surveys and reaction wheels.
One of them was also exchanged on servicing missions 3B.
Then, the last one is illustrated here servicing mission 4, in May 2009, the very last visit to Hubble, where there was a whole set of exchanges made, particularly the batteries, and the gyroscopes again.
There was a new camera installed, the cosmic origins spectrograph, a spectrograph rather than a camera.
The idea was to do a servicing of the telescope to maximize its lifetime.
The idea was to give it at least a 10-year lifetime, if not more, because that was the last visit and we wanted to be able to use a telescope effectively for science for as long as possible because servicing was no longer a possibility after the retirement of the Shuttle in 2011.
Bye-bye Hubble!
This is one of the last views of Hubble after the completion of the servicing mission 4, again, in May 2009.
The telescope has just been released and you can see in the bottom part of the telescope the crew installed a docking feature because when the telescope is no longer usable, hopefully about ten years from now, not less than that, around 2025 or so, it will become a space debris and we don't want to let it come down to Earth on its own in a random manner; we want to go to it with robots and docking ports and do a controlled deorbit probably over the Pacific Ocean.
Again, hopefully sometime not earlier than 2025.
