The Challenger accident in January 1986 was a very tragic event in the history of the Shuttle program.
It resulted in the loss of the crew and the loss of the spaceship in the ascent to space.
You see here the logo of the mission 51L, which is the 24th Shuttle mission.
You have the NASA crew members in the circle, and in the bottom, you have two so called Payload Specialists:
Christa McAuliffe, who was the first teacher in space in the Teacher in Space program, and Greg Jarvis--two Payload Specialists.
It was very cold that morning, morning of the 28th of January 1986, and you can see on the left-hand side the picture that was taken on the launchpad, very early morning that day, and there was some hesitation to go, because we were somewhat outside of the certification for the Space Shuttle to launch-- the temperature was below certification temperature.
However the launch was pursued and continued the launch countdown, and you see on the right-hand side the lift off, time T-zero just after ignition of the Solid Rocket Boosters, and you can see here a path of smoke coming out of the right Solid Rocket Booster.
Of course, it was not noted at that time.
That was noted only afterwards on this picture.
The Shuttle continued on the first stage, and 73 seconds after lift off we have that tragic event-- an explosion of the Space Shuttle, and you see the two Solid Rocket Boosters that come apart, and they fly independently on top of the picture.
Obviously there was an investigation that was done shortly after the accident.
I have to say that it was not a hesitation about the continuation of the program, but NASA was resilient enough to still decide to continue the program.
There was an interruption of two and a half years of the program itself.
The Rogers Commission, the commission that was in charge of investigating this accident got as a result of this investigation that the cause of the accident was a plume that developed after lift off from this field joint of the right Solid Rocket Booster-- you saw the path of smoke at lift off, but the hot gases generated in the Solid Rocket Booster leaked outside of that joint and at some point the temperature was so high around the external tank that it caused destruction of the orbiter
73 seconds after lift off.
So the cause of the accident was a failure of the field joint to contain the hot gases inside the Solid Rocket Booster and destruction of the orbiter resulting from that.
Now, we talk about
Solid Rocket Booster field joints-- you see several cylindrical joints on the Solid Rocket Booster from the nozzle to the tip, and some factory joints that were made at Morton Thiokol, the manufacturer of the Solid Rocket Booster, and the field joints, we see three of them here, were made at Kennedy Space Center, the cylindrical parts sent from Morton Thiokol were put together with the system that was really flawed, and the Rogers Commission clearly made the statement that there was a flaw in the design of the field joint of the Solid Rocket Boosters.
Now, let's look on the left-hand side of the old design of the field joints of the Solid Rocket Booster.
You have to imagine one cylinder at the bottom and a cylinder on the top, and this is the field joint that we are talking about.
The section of the lowest cylinder is in red on this joint, and the section of the upper cylinder is in yellow, and the inside of the Solid
Rocket Booster is here, on the right-hand side, so this is where the hot gases are generated, and obviously there is pressure in this direction at the ignition of the Solid Rocket Booster during the whole combustion process, and there is pressure in the same direction in the bottom part.
And here you see in green the two O-rings that are supposed to cause a seal and prevent the hot gases from coming out.
And obviously if you have the yellow segment on the top moving to the left and the red portion in the bottom moving to the left also, you are going to have a small gap that will be formed in this area here, and the O-rings may not be able to contain the hot gases and prevent them from coming out.
Now, as it was very cold that day the O-rings did not have the resilience and capability to prevent the hot gases from coming out.
So really the cause of the accident was, on one hand, the faulty design, this field joint, as indicated here, and also the low temperature that prevented the O-ring from performing the expected task.
If you look on the right-hand side, you have the fix that was implemented.
This is following recommendations of the Rogers Commission.
You see here so called "capture feature" that prevented the separation between the red part and the yellow part with the O-rings here.
There was another O-ring that was added here, and in addition, there was a heater system that was added to maintain a relatively high temperature in the area of every field joint of the Solid Rocket Booster.
So this is the main cause of the accident and of course there were other contributing factors.
The pressure at launch was on of them.
At that time the Shuttle was going to be used not only for science and exploration, but also for commercial missions or for the Department of Defense, and after the Challenger accident, it was decided to only use the Shuttle for research and development, and science, and not for commercial missions or Department of Defense missions.
Also other improvements were brought together, like the use of the Launch and Entry Suit, which was not used before, in order to protect the crew against possible failures during the ascent, like a loss of cabin pressure.
NASA took advantage on the basis of the recommendations of the Rogers Commission to improve the safety of the Space Shuttle and, in general, to improve the safety culture of the organization.
