Following the Challenger accident in January 1986 and after implementation of the recommendations of the Rogers Commission that did the investigation on the cause of the accident,
NASA had 17 years of accident-free Shuttle operation at the end of the 80's, during the whole 90's and the beginning of the year 2000.
Unfortunately STS-107, which lifted off in January 2003 had another accident during the re-entry of the spaceship about two weeks later.
And this is a view of the Shuttle ascending to orbit-- the first stage where we have two Solid Rocket Boosters and three hydrogen engines.
And this is seen from a camera-- it was close to the launchpad, so we only see the bottom of the vehicle, but at this point you see that there is a piece of thermal protection of the external tank that has detached from the tank, and you see it moving towards the wing, and at this point obviously these pictures we're not seeing real time but obviously it has probably hit the wing, and just later you see that there is powder close to the trailing edge of the left wing indicating clearly that it had hit the leading edge of the wing.
NASA did a study, and they came to the conclusion that this is foam, it's low density, and in all probability it had not caused any damage to the leading edge of the wing.
So the mission continued, the ascent continued normally, and the mission took place for about two weeks.
It was a mission that was an autonomous mission.
In the middle of a set of missions that had as an objective to assemble the International Space Station, this one was not bound to the International Space Station-- it was an autonomous science mission.
Now we will be able to see in a rapid motion the detachment of this piece of foam from the external tank hitting the wing and then fragmented close to the trailing edge of the wing.
And that's what was seen not at the time of the launch itself, but it was seen afterwards, of course.
All these pictures were analyzed after the launch.
This is the view of the Mission Control Center during the re-entry of Columbia on the 1st of February of 2003, just at the time there was a loss of contact with Columbia.
You see the trajectory here in yellow and about the area of Dallas-Fort Worth the contact was lost with Columbia.
And these are very tragic views that people had in this area of Texas around Dallas-Fort Worth.
It was very early in the morning, and we could see not one trail of the re-entry of the Shuttle, like was seen usually, but obviously the spaceship had broken up.
It was another tragedy for NASA-- personal tragedy, first, because of the loss of life of the seven crew members.
Obviously there was an investigation that was put in place: the CAIB--Columbia Accident 
Investigation Board.
They did some tests of the effects of the impact of a piece of foam from the external tank to the leading edge of the wing, and you see the setup for the test on the left-hand side, and you see the result on the right-hand side.
Obviously, unlike what NASA had thought when they saw these videos that I showed before, this piece of foam had done damage to the leading edge of the wing, and, of course, if you have a hole like this one, a pretty large hole, during the re-entry, you have the hot gases coming inside the wing, and the wing is made of aluminium and if you have a temperature of close to 1000 degrees it is going to melt the aluminium, and obviously Columbia had been destroyed because of that hole caused by this impact of the foam during launch.
Obviously another thorough investigation, as mentioned, and a set of recommendations given to NASA.
For a while there was the idea that maybe the program would stop completely, but the International Space Station was still in assembly phase and not fully assembled, and NASA decided to just continue with the Shuttle program and respect all the agreements with the partners of the International Space Station.
The main recommendations were really, first of all, to fix the problem of detachment of thermal protection from the external tank, but also give a possibility to the crew to do inspections of the thermal protection system while on orbit and be sure there was no fatal damage to this thermal protection, and also there was a possibility for the crew to do repair, space walking, and they had all the tools and materials to do repair of the Shuttle thermal protection system in case it was needed for a safe re-entry.
And also all of the missions had as an objective--except one-- had as an objective assembly of the International Space Station, so in case any severe damage, irreparable, would have been detected the crew could have taken place in the International Space Station waiting for rescue by another Shuttle some time later, except that there was one mission that did not go to the International Space Station-- that was the last servicing mission of Hubble, STS-125, but NASA decided eventually to still take the risk with another Shuttle on the launchpad ready to go and rescue the crew in case there was going to be a detection of fatal damage to the thermal protection system of the Shuttle on this mission.
