We'll talk about logistics supply to ISS right now.
Of course, we don't only have to bring people up there, astronauts and cosmonauts and back to Earth, we also need to have the capability to bring cargo to bring fuel, to bring water out of which the oxygen is provided on board the station and various equipment, experiments and obviously food and we also need to have the capability to bring things back down to Earth.
We're talking about equipment or trash.
When we have trash, of course, we don't let it go into space freely but we want to have a planned return to Earth, destructive reentry of trash to Earth.
These are the systems that have been used so far for supplying cargo to the International Space Station.
This is the Progress we've talked about before.
This is provided by Japan, it's the so-called HTV.
This is the Dragon from the
US commercial company Space X.
This is ATV. We've already talked about ATV before.
It's a pretty large supplier of cargo to ISS.
It flew five times, provided by ESA but it's no longer in operation.
And here we have two versions of the so-called Cygnus cargo spacecraft that is provided by Orbital Sciences.
This is a somewhat older version.
This is a new version of the Cygnus cargo spacecraft bound to the International Space Station with the round solar arrays.
Here we have a comparison of the sizes and also the docking interfaces of these various cargo vehicles for the International Space Station and we have a comparison with the Apollo spacecraft.
On the far left we have the HTV from Japan.
The interface of HTV to the International Space Station is such that it can be docked to the USOS part of the International Space Station, either top or bottom ports of Node 2, which is at the front of the International Space Station.
Here you see the ATV,
Automatic Transfer Vehicle, no longer used but it was used five times as I mentioned before.
About the same size as HTV.
It could carry about 7 tonnes of freight to ISS.
And you see the docking interface is the same as the Progress or Soyuz.
Docking or mating with ISS is always done in the rear port of ISS in the Russian segment.
We already talked about Progress before.
You see the same interface here.
A somewhat smaller resupply vehicle to ISS able to carry about 2 tonnes of freight and propellant and water.
There was an interesting situation at the beginning of 2011 when we had a grand total of 6 visiting vehicles at ISS.
Of course, we had the Shuttle here.
This is the US segment and this is the Russian segment.
We had the Space Shuttle on the top ports of Node 2.
This is Node 2.
We had the HTV and we could also have had one at the bottom port.
We could have had a Dragon, for instance.
The Dragon as well as HTV are always docked to ISS via the US segment.
And on the Russian side, we have two Soyuz's and one Progress.
One Soyuz, another Soyuz and a Progress.
And sometimes there's a capability for the crew, the Russian crew, to move Soyuz from one port to the other.
They go in the ascent and descent module and they have thrusters that they can use via rotational and translational hand controllers in order to move from one place to the other. and here in the back, using the same interface, we had ATV too at that time.
So a grand total of 6 visiting vehicles at ISS at that time.
That's a nice picture of a Progress as it's getting close to docking with the International Space Station.
Again, as well, Soyuz and Progress normally go through an automatic final approach and docking to ISS, although with the Soyuz we can have manual takeover of the control from inside by the commander inside the Soyuz to do a manual approach and docking, which has been done a few times.
This is a Progress.
The only difference with a Soyuz is that the so-called descent module of Soyuz is replaced by this segment here which is basically used as a propellant tank, not so much for the Progress itself but bringing propellant or fuel to the International Space Station.
And, of course, we have the on-orbit module and the service module with the solar array, so very similar to the
Soyuz manned spacecraft.
Another view, a very nice view, of ATV shortly before docking, again, to the rear part of ISS and the Russian segment.
This is the docking interface which we see here, the four solar arrays.
A very capable vehicle and quite a learning experience for ESA which had to develop all the automatic rendezvous and all the sensors for the final approach and rendezvous and docking to ISS.
As mentioned before, all the resupply spacecraft that get to the International 
Space Station on the Russian segment, whether it's ATV in the past or Progress right now, directly dock to ports on the Russian segment.
But the other resupply vehicles as well as the HTV from Japan, which we see here, come into the vicinity of the International Space Station they fly formation, they are controlled to come and fly formation, and then they are grappled with the space station robotic arm normally commanded from the cupola of the International Space Station and they become in a docking position either on top or in the bottom of Node 2.
It's the same for the Dragon vehicle provided by Space X.
Right now we have the HTV, the Dragon and the Cygnus vehicles which all three are grappled with the robotic arm on the docking port on the US segment.
Already in 2006, before the last flight of the Space Shuttle in 2011,
NASA had developed the so-called COTS program
Commercial Orbital
Transportation Services.
The idea was to be able to provide transportation of cargo and freight, and fuel and water from US soil to the
International Space Station.
So there was sponsoring of companies which were on the one hand willing and had the capability to develop these systems.
And later this developed into the
Commercial Crew Development (CCDev).
And we have three companies involved,
Space X on the one hand,
Boeing and, more recently,
Sierra Nevada Corporation.
And then came the Commercial Resupply Services (CRS), with two phases,
Space X and Orbital Sciences for the first phase and, for the second phase, we add
Sierra Nevada Corporation.
And meanwhile, Orbital Sciences became Orbital ATK.
These are the requirements given by NASA to these commercial companies which will provide services to the International Space Station as well as cargo and personnel transfer.
NASA does the cargo pickup, the cargo integration and the companies have to provide these: on the one hand, external cargo delivery and disposal, internal cargo delivery and disposal, internal cargo delivery and return, and crew transportation, which is illustrated by these four colors here.
And there's also return, which is part of this contract.
So the crew return, the cargo return and the cargo trash disposal, these are the three elements.
So this has started already with Space X with the Dragon and Cygnus of the Orbital Sciences Corporation, ATK.
And obviously we have the Japanese that provide part of that service also now, but outside of the COTS contract, obviously.
Here we have a nice view of mating in the bottom ports of Node 2.
You see here the mating interface of the Dragon, the Dragon resupply vehicle for freight and cargo, and you can see the robot arm that has been used to grapple Dragon as it was flying in close formation with ISS, grabbed by the crew and then installed in that docking interface.
A nice view of part of the Station.
On the left-hand side, the robot arm of the Station that has just grappled Cygnus, the last version of the Cygnus spacecraft, bringing resupply equipment to ISS.
And this is an illustration, an artist's illustration, of the cargo version of the Dream Chaser.
The Dream Chaser will be first of all used to bring crews, six to seven crew members, to ISS and then back to Earth, similarly to the Space Shuttle, but in a much smaller size.
The later version of Dream Chaser will be the cargo version, able to bring freight and equipment to ISS and then back to Earth, not, of course, in a destructive mode but it will fly back to the Earth pretty much like the Shuttle did and land on a runway.
