Hello, my name is Carol Christian,
I'm an astronomer, and I work at the Space Telescope
Science Institute.
And we are the Science Center for the Hubble Space Telescope, and also the James Webb Telescope, which will be launched in 2018, and a couple of other telescopes after that.
Our institution is located on the Johns Hopkins campus in Baltimore, Maryland, and we are funded by NASA to run the telescope for the science community.
And I am the Project Scientist for Outreach for Hubble.
I have done some other jobs there too at my Institution.
I've been there a while, but currently I do outreach for the Hubble Space Telescope, and I really enjoy doing that.
It's a very exciting telescope to work with.
Hubble Space Telescope was designed to do astronomical research.
It's somewhat similar to ground-based telescopes, and it's complementary to other space telescopes.
It works in the optical, the ultraviolet, and the near-infrared.
Its goal is to provide a facility for scientists who are doing astronomical research, and the kind of research they're doing is to look at, a little bit, the Solar System.
We have looked at Mars, and Pluto, and Jupiter.
There's a monitoring program for solar system objects.
We also look at planets in other star systems, how they form.
How many planets are there?
Are they similar to our Solar System?
And then how do those stars form?
How do stars in general form?
What are they made of?
We also look at galaxies, how galaxies form, how they interact, and how they trace out the structure of the universe.
And then we look at the Universe as a whole.
How is it expanding?
How far does it extend?
And what is it made of?
So, for example, there's the luminous material, which we call it.
That's the stuff we can see.
And then there's dark matter and dark energy.
So in general, the Hubble Space Telescope is purely for astronomical research which is designed by the scientific community.
So at the top level, I would say we are transforming our speculation, imagination, and then the hypothesis about what the nature of our universe is, and we probe that, and turn that into a realistic picture of what the Universe is, using those hypotheses, and then testing them and collecting data.
And the Hubble Space Telescope then collects the necessary data, often complemented by other telescopes, to get a complete picture of how all the things in the universe form.
So basically, I'd say, we're taking imagination and turning it into reality with the telescope-- with regards to the nature of the universe, what the structure of it is, what it has in it, and where it came from, and where we're going.
So I should mention that the funding agency is both the European
Space Agency and NASA, so National Aeronautics
Space Administration, in the US, and also the Canadian Space Agency has a part of it.
So the funding then really goes in partnership to NASA, so they essentially have the choice of where the telescope is going to be pointed.
But in actuality, it's actually the science community as a whole that decides where the telescope will be pointed.
And the way we do that is every year-- and this just happened in January of 2016, and it happens every year-- we put out an announcement:
"Hey, we're ready to accept proposals."
And we have a big description post for the telescope-- how the instruments work, what they can look at.
And then people talk about their science, they write up their science, say what they want to do, and what instruments they want to use, and how many instruments they want to use, and they send those proposals to us.
And in general we get about
1,000-1,500 proposals every year, and they're all award-winning proposals, but we can only accommodate about 1 in 5.
So the competition is very, very high.
And we have 3,000 orbits.
That means 3,000 times the telescope goes around the Earth in a year, and can be pointing at things.
So typically, one proposal will have many authors and many targets to look at, and so that's why we can't accommodate everybody.
But then what happens is after we get the proposals, representatives of the science community, from ESA, from the US, and from around the world, come to Baltimore and, by category-- galaxies, planets, etc., there are panels of scientists who look at other scientists' proposals.
And we're very careful about conflicts, so that we don't have somebody who doesn't like somebody else, or who's in competition judging a proposal, and also people who are best buddies.
We try to make it very objective by the science community to choose the observations.
Then, when that happens, the <i>best of the best</i> get sent to our director.
He then okays the list, and then we send it to NASA, and NASA says, "Great, go ahead, start scheduling the telescope."
So we do this every year, and it takes months to do this every year.
So during that time, the telescope is still observing, and we're still pointing it everywhere in the sky, but we're also doing the review process for the next year.
So, in general, the people who decide who's going to use the telescope are the science community.
I would say that, as far as NASA and ESA, and the community in general,
Hubble is probably the most successful space mission.
We have some contenders, of course: Mars, recently New Horizons going to Pluto.
There are very successful missions, but as far as astronomy in general,
Hubble is very successful.
And as far as the astronomical community feels, it is <i>the</i> most productive observatory we've ever had in the history of humankind.
So it is very productive, it met all of its goals, and it also contributed to discoveries of things we never imagined when the telescope was built-- like dark energy, probing dark matter, things like that.
But we expected to measure the expansion of the universe.
We expected to measure galaxies, and understand how they, and the stars in them, form, and it's just been spectacular, because every observation explains a little more about the universe but poses new questions.
So it's not like a checklist we're going, "Yup, we learned that, yup, we learned that."
Instead, every time we learn something, we have another puzzle.
So it's very, very successful-- it works beautifully, it's been in operation for over 25 years, and it really is a fantastic facility.
Yes, so the Hubble Space Telescope, because it's in orbit around the Earth, is subjected to a little tiny bit of atmosphere of the Earth.
Now, there's not much up there, of course, but there is a little bit, just enough, and it creates a drag on the telescope.
And the atmosphere actually gets puffed up, or inflated, by activity from the Sun.
So when there's a lot of activity on the Sun, a lot of magnetic fields and particles being ejected out in the Solar System, our atmosphere actually puffs up, and that causes the drag on the telescope to increase.
So at some point, Hubble will start-- it already has-- the orbit starts to degrade, and then at some point, it will degrade a lot.
At that point, we will have to go get it.
So NASA has plans to go send a robot to get the telescope and to bring it back down to Earth, probably dumping it in the ocean, because nobody wants a huge telescope to land on their house.
So we have to control the reentry.
That's not going to happen for a long time.
It may not happen until 2025, or beyond.
But that doesn't mean astronomers have been idle.
We have been planning-- since it takes so long to build a space telescope, we've already been planning the next telescopes, and one of those is the James Webb telescope.
Now, it isn't really a replacement for Hubble.
Hubble really doesn't have a "replacement" the way we think of it, but there is the next telescope, and that telescope will mostly be observing a little bit in the optical, but mostly in the infrared.
This is more heat energy, and so what we're going to try to look at, our star formation region, looking through the dust into the core of star formation regions.
Also, mapping the unseen parts of galaxies, and then looking far out in the universe where the light from very distant objects is redshifted through the expansion of the universe.
So James Webb is going to be probing different parts of the universe, and different kinds of objects, to more deeply understand the phenomenon that we've already been looking at with Hubble.
Beyond that, astronomers have big imaginations.
We have a survey telescope, which is about the same size as Hubble, but will have a bigger field, so it will be much wider so we can do big samples in the universe, and then even beyond that, we'd like to have a large telescope which we sometimes call the <i>High-Definition Space Telescope</i>, but that will be out 2030, or something like that. but we have to start planning now--
What are the science questions?
What is the technology we need in order to answer those questions?
And then can we build that technology?
Is it feasible?
So we need a cooperation between scientists, engineers, and then of course people who do the budget, because sometimes they say,
"That sounds great, but you can't afford it."
So there will be a series of telescopes coming after Hubble, but we believe Hubble will last until at least 2020, and we hope beyond.
For people who are interested in astronomy,
I did a lot of astronomy reading on my own.
I was a physics major, and I did a lot of mathematics training, as well.
Don't be afraid of it.
Once you get used to it, it's actually quite fascinating to do mathematics and also physics.
The other thing is, to get involved in a more informal way, you can go to our website.
So there's something called the <i>HubbleSite</i>, that's its name, <i>hubblesite.org</i>, and there are a lot of resources there where you can read about the telescope, learn about the telescope, and also learn all the things that the telescope has been doing.
You can find out about what's going to be observed in the future with the telescope.
And we also have a number of social media, like Facebook and Twitter, where we put out alerts about what's happening, and then once you hear about that, and you go, "Oh, boy!
I'd like to know more!"
You can go back to <i>HubbleSite</i> and learn about it.
As well, we have a weekly, it's <i>usually</i> weekly, Hubble Hangout.
If you do a Google Search of <i>Hubble Hangout</i>, you can find it on Google+ or on YouTube.
And in the <i>Hubble Hangout</i> what we do is we talk to the researchers who are using Hubble, and we say,
"So, what was your idea?
What did you want to look at?
What are you trying to find out?
What kind of data did you collect?
How did you think of this idea, and what did you learn?"
And sometimes they're not finished, so we're always looking forward to getting them back on the <i>Hubble Hangout</i>.
But it's usually every week, on a Thursday, but all of the Hangouts are archived on YouTube, and so you can watch them, and you can pick which subject you think is the most interesting.
So there are a lot of internet resources.
Mostly, I would say, you would want to pursue mathematics and branches of science, and see if you like it-- not just the details, but do you like the process?
Do you like exploration?
Thinking things up?
Trying to discover new things?
And looking at the universe in a different way than you look at it every day.
And when you start thinking about things like that, then you're doing science, and you're ready to start thinking about what kind of science you want to do, and maybe it will be astronomy.
Oh boy!
You know, they're all really fantastic.
We do a lot on Hubble, and we do some on the James Webb telescope, and we hope to do some more on that, because they're putting the mirrors in the telescope now, and so they are building it as we speak.
That's pretty exciting.
We've had some really interesting ones, on exoplanets-- how other planets around other stars are formed.
We had a recent one where there was an observation of a gravitational lens, and they found a supernova, and then they predicted when it would reappear.
And they looked for it all through
November and December of 2015, and then they found it, so that was pretty exciting.
So, I don't know, I love it all.
My specialty is star clusters, but I enjoy talking to the authors about all the different kinds of research that they do.
So mostly what I do, as the Outreach Scientist, is I work with our animators and visualization experts, on trying to convey the science results that the scientists who are using
Hubble Space Telescope have discovered.
So we have images, and we take those images and try to show the images in a way where anyone can look at the image and start to understand what kind of astrophysics is going on.
Like when you look at a nebula, and you see filamentary structure; when you look at a place where there might be an exoplanet; when you look at a galaxy, and understand the dust lanes and the gas, and how star clusters form in it.
So first of all we're taking the data, and trying to represent it so that it's immediately obvious, or with a little explanation, what kind of astrophysics is going on in those places.
Secondly, sometimes we need to have a visualization or an artist's conception of what's going on.
So we have animators and graphic artists who try to show,
"Well, this is what the image looks like, but this is what the physics and astronomy is behind that physics."
And so I help the graphic artists and visualization folks depict that, in as realistic a manner as possible.
And then I, myself, I'm working on a little bit of a different project, which is not quite visualization, but in that case what we're doing is we're taking Hubble images and we are transforming them into 3D structures and printing them on a 3D printer, which is pretty cool, but what's even more interesting to me is that we are putting textures on them so that we can present them to the visually-impaired individuals, and we have a big community here in Baltimore that reaches out to visually-impaired individuals.
And this helps visually-impaired individuals then "see" our imagery, because they can't see through their eyes, but they can "see" through touch, and so we are trying to represent and test our representation of the images that people who can see can appreciate.
We're trying to turn them into a 3D map of the object so that people can feel it, and then understand--
What is a star cluster?
What is a galaxy?
So it's an experimental project, and I'm learning a lot about how people perceive the universe, not only using their eyes, but using their mind, and in this case, touch.
So it's a pretty exciting project.
It's an experiment, but it's coming along.
That's what we're trying to achieve.
I must admit, we had a little bit of a problem with our printer, but we hope that we will be able to put a library of the files out on the internet, and then anybody can print them.
We are using a low-end printer.
We don't want to use the real high-end fancy printers, because we want to test what we're doing with printers that people will be able to get at home.
So that is our goal.
I'm hoping over the next year we can start rolling out the library.
What we want to do is make sure the representation is scientifically accurate, but we also want to make sure that blind people can actually distinguish the different features of an image before we start pushing the files out.
We have a lot of testing to do, but yes, it is our intention to make all of those files available to the public.
Well, I became an astronomer--
First, I became a physicist, because I really liked physics a lot.
I really liked understanding how things work.
And that translated--
Then I started reading about astronomy, and I realized that physics is really from the smallest, tiniest atom and particle that makes up an atom, to the universe.
And so when trying to choose within physics, as a discipline, what I was mostly interested in,
I decided astrophysics would be really amazing.
I did grow up in a place where the night sky was quite beautiful, and so I was familiar with the night sky, and was always fascinated by it, but I really hadn't thought about astronomy as a career until I went to college.
So then I decided to study astronomy, and I worked, actually, at a couple of ground-based telescopes originally.
And that's where you go to the mountain, and you use the telescope to look at the sky.
And we learned amazing things, and I still love those environments.
I love mountains, anyway, and so being up in the mountains at night is just fantastic.
So I had an opportunity to work on a NASA mission, which I did, in California.
It was also a satellite.
And I worked there a couple years, and then I had an opportunity to come to the Hubble Space Telescope.
And so I was actually offered the opportunity to do outreach education and participate in creating the news from the Hubble Space Telescope, and so it seemed like a very exciting thing to do.
So I came to Baltimore, to work at my Institution in doing that.
Besides sharing the discoveries and the excitement, it means that I can learn about, and I can interact with people doing all kinds of astronomy, not just my own field.
So I like really learning about everything that the telescope and other telescopes were doing.
And on top of that, in addition to interacting with other scientists,
I learned that it is really a challenge sometimes to represent those discoveries, and let people appreciate how beautiful the Universe is, and how complex it is, and how fascinating it is, not just through the imagery, but actually how the stuff works, and why it all fits together.
It fits together really well.
And those are hard concepts to translate, and so I've been very interested in what kind of technologies can we use to transmit that information?
So I've worked in radio,
I've worked in <i>Hangouts</i>,
I've worked a little bit in visualization, a little bit in social media, and now I'm working on this 3D-printer project.
So it's all about can technology help us understand the universe which we can't touch?
