Hello and welcome back.
Yes in this segment we wish to briefly describe the underlying logic behind The Market Opportunity
Navigator.
As pointed out before The Market
Opportunity
Navigator is easy to apply business tool that helps you to make the right market opportunity choice. Exactly but to make the right choice you actually need to understand three important questions;
First, what are the market opportunities that are actually available for us.
Second, what are the most attractive market opportunities for us.
And then third, what market opportunities should we focus on.
Corresponding with these three important questions
The
Market Opportunity Navigator includes three steps.
First, the "Market Opportunity Set" which helps you to identify the most attractive market opportunities for your technologies or for your resources.
Second, the "Attractiveness Map" which helps to understand the value inherent and the challenges inherent in each of the market opportunities.
And third, the "Agile Focused
Strategy" which helps to make a smart strategic choice, where to focus but also which other options to keep open.
Exactly, and this is how the main design board of the
Navigator looks like with the three steps that Marc just described.
You can actually use sticky notes to represent each market opportunity and mark them on the dartboard.
First, your market opportunity set, second, your attractiveness map; and third, your agile focus dartboard.
Overall this tool guide you step by step as you progress from the many possible options, to recognizing patterns among these options to make distinctions between these options to ultimately arriving at a well-designed strategy for your venture.
Yes, and the final outcome of this process is the Agile Focus Strategy.
Let's take a moment to understand what it actually means.
The Agile Focused Strategy clearly defines the market opportunities that you will pursue now and the opportunities that you will keep open as backup all growth options.
This helps you to manage your startup with foresight and agility while facing uncertainty. And what you create is ultimately a smart portfolio of options and smart portfolio of options, these options are actually very essential, very important to run in the right direction and do so with agility.
Also in case you need to pivot over time.
Eventually, and that's what we've seen with many startups already it will help you to unleash the potential inherent in your resources and create the most value from your effort.
And also, the Agile Focus Strategy has many implications for how you build and design your venture.
Exactly.
In addition to the benefits of the
Agile
Focus Strategy which is the outcome of this process using a framework for making this profound decision can actually help you in making a more informed choice one that will increase your likelihood for succeeding.
And it will also come to think about it provide you with a shared language within the team when you want to debate discuss about market opportunities but also with other people around.
Think about when you talk about talk with venture capitalists business agents anyone who might have an interest in your startup, this provides a very precise language.
Exactly, and not just that you know market opportunity choice might change over time.
So you can always go back to the structured evaluation trace it track it and update your strategy if necessary.
Accountability is one thing, and looking forward is another thing.
Exactly.
Have you been asking yourself lately, how do I identify blockbuster market opportunities?
Have I missed out on any?
How do I know what is the most attractive market opportunity for us?
Okay now, let go of seemingly attractive options, and if market opportunity choice is so important, how can I hedge my bets?
If you have been asking yourself those questions and perhaps others this MOOC is for you.
Yes it will show you how to use the Market
Opportunity
Navigator to support your market choice and therefore make sure that you are running in the right direction and remaining agile while doing so.
Join us.