Hello and welcome to our MOOC which market to play in a tool for entrepreneurs and innovators.
I'm Sharon and I'm Marc and will be our guides for this course. In this course we wish to help entrepreneurs and innovators in making one of the most profound decisions for the venture that is which markets to play in.
For this purpose we will present to you an easy to apply business tool called the market opportunity navigator that offers a structured framework for making this complex and many would say most important decision in your venturing or innovation process.
But before we go into the details let us briefly introduce ourselves.
So I'm Marc Gruber
I'm vice President for Innovation of
EPFL which is the École Polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne in
Switzerland that beautiful Lake of Geneva so we cannot complain about on location.
I'm professor for entrepreneurship and technology commercialization at my school and in this capacity after lots of research lots of teaching on technology commercialization amongst others you know on this idea of market opportunity identification that we will talk about in this book and I'm Sharon Tal the co-founder and former executive director of the entrepreneurship center at the Technion
Israel Institute of Technology.
I also teach marketing for many years now both for films and start ups using my vast experience as a marketing manager and as a strategic consultant.
So over the last years we've done lots of research projects we basically investigated hundreds if not thousands of start ups in technology to understand this very critical early states decision of what type of market you can identify and focus on.
We actually learned many things from these studies but probably the most important thing that we understood was that there was no structured framework for entrepreneur and innovators when they strive to make this profound decision.
This actually turned to be the basis for the market opportunity
Navigator.
And together we wrote this book here that takes you by the hand and guides use of the three steps of the market opportunity navigator.
The book is filled and the book is filled with lots of interesting examples case studies from many countries around the world.
This book will be your companion for this MOOC.
So to begin with let's look at the market opportunity choice in firms.
This is a very profound decision for two main reasons.
First your choice of market opportunity will influence your chances for success.
It will influence how you get traction in the market how you gain profits and how you create value for your films.
So in a way it's like finding fertile ground and growing your tree on the fertile ground.
But second it also imprints your venture or your innovation process in the sense that the decision that you make in terms of your focus market will then shape other decisions that you will take over time and that then puts you in a certain trend channel or path.
And this will actually be very difficult to undo if you need to change direction.
Exactly and that's why this is such a profound decision.
However this is a very difficult decision to make.
As David Roth the co-founder and CEO of Opfers wrote in an interesting article on Forbes understanding where to focus is a real dilemma for entrepreneurs and he also mentions in that article that firms rarely fail because their teams don't work hard enough but they fail because their teams actually work on the wrong things.
So why is this such a difficult situation or decision?
Well first there is always uncertainty.
Uncertainty is actually inherent to the innovative process.
There will always be known unknowns and also unknown unknowns that will make this decision difficult for you.
And then there are always trade-offs you know think about some markets being large growing quickly other markets being small but well protected et cetera et cetera. So it's a decision with many variables to decide on.
And in addition markets are constantly changing and what seems to be promising today might turn out to be less promising in the future.
Making the right market opportunity choice is definitely key for creating significant value and success.
But as we saw from our studies there are several possible mistakes that entrepreneurs might make as they go through this process.
So let's see what can go wrong as you make your market opportunity choice.
First start ups may simply choose to focus on the wrong market opportunity that is an opportunity that does not bear real potential for value creation.
In fact many well-known firms started by focusing on the wrong market opportunity.
Just take a look at all these well known companies beyond us what they all have in common is starting with the wrong market opportunity.
Luckily for us they managed to change their strategy and find a promising opportunity at the end.
And this is not only anecdotal evidence actually there's lots of research out there that looks at this question why firms fail and there is one study for instance by CBN search that looked at 100 more than 100 startups and they found that 42 percent of these startups actually fail because there was a lack of market need so there's clearly something to be learned from that insight as well.
So before you start running fast make sure that you're running in the right direction but choosing smartly doesn't end in finding the most promising market opportunity to focus on you must also take into account how to focus without losing your agility.
In fact an improper balance between focus and flexibility is actually the second mistake when startups choose their market opportunity strategy.
Why would this happen?
Well on one hand startups must focus sharply or else they won't be able to survive and the reason for this advice is fairly clear.
More ventures as costs on resources and thus they must not spread their efforts totally but that is a big BUT on the other hand Startups must stay flexible and agile to be able to adapt quickly because unforeseeable things may happen along the way and typically do happen.
So if you choose one market opportunity and completely ignore all other options you might be in trouble down the road.
In order not to lose your focus but also not to get trapped you need to keep some market opportunities open.
This will help you to develop your resources and capabilities in a wider manner and keep your cognitive flexibility up.
So here is a quote by Stephen Kaufer who was one of the founders of TripAdvisor the well-known firm he says if you are a lightning focused on just one thing and aren't willing to consider others you probably don't have the flexibility to make it when things don't go according to plan.
So that's one truism; things won't go according to plan.
So as you start running make sure not to lock yourself into one specific direction.
In this MOOC we will present to you The Market
Opportunity
Navigator which will help you to make the right market choice and reap the greatest benefit from your commercialization efforts.
The Market Opportunity Navigator is a business tool that will help you to discover promising market opportunities evaluate their value and set your strategic focus smartly to make sure that you are running in the right direction and remaining agile without losing your focus.
Join us in this exciting learning journey.
