Hi there and welcome back.
In this video we will briefly discuss how the market opportunity navigator complements other well-known business tools and was actually designed to work seamlessly with them.
As we mentioned before the market opportunity navigator is an easy to apply business tool that helps you to identify and assess potential opportunities in a systematic and rigorous manner as you choose which options to focus on.
It not only gives you the ability to deliberately plan your strategy but also to reflect on your learning and to adjust your strategy as you progress through your learning journey.
To make this learning process broader and even more complete we recommend that you use the market opportunity navigator together with other key methods and business tools.
Specifically, the navigator is designed to work seamlessly with the Business Model and Value Proposition Canvases created by Alexander Austovade and Eve Vienia and with the Lean's Startup
Methodology created by Eric Reese and Steve Blank.
While the canvases are outstanding frameworks for planning your strategy, the Lean's
Startup is a key method for validating your strategy.
Together with the Market Opportunity
Navigator they form a powerful suite of tools that clearly lays out the planning and validation processes as you strive to find your promising path.
In fact these tools work together like cogwheels with one reinforcing the other as they provide different aspects that are all essential for setting of strategy.
So, let us briefly examine this reinforcement.
The business model canvas and the value proposition canvas offer valuable frameworks that help you to find out how you create value for your customers and how you create value for your firm.
The Navigator which provides the macro view of the landscape of opportunities has an essential level of analysis with the micro planning of the Business Model and the Value Proposition Canvases.
Together these tools provide the comprehensive planning that is required for finding your most fertile ground.
The Lean's Startup Methodology offers an important validation process for discovering and developing customers through rapid experimentations and continuous pivoting.
The combination of the Navigator with the Lean's Startup Methodology were two powerful process for validating a winning strategy.
First, the navigator provides an ongoing tool for planning, reflecting, and adjusting as you go through rapid Lean's cycles of experimenting.
And second, the navigator makes sure that you will always keep track of the broad picture in addition to the path that you're currently testing.
Overall, we strongly recommend that you combine these different tools as you search for a promising strategy.
In fact this suite of business tools can help you understand fundamental questions in a manner that none of the tools by itself would allow you to.
So the hole is actually greater than the sum of its parts.
To understand this in more details we will discuss how to use the navigator in concert with these tools in week five of this MOOC.