Hello and welcome back in this video we're going to show you the market between navigator in a nutshell.
Yes.
The market opportunity navigator is designed to help you master your market opportunity choice.
It offers three steps for discovering and strategizing your most valuable market opportunities.
So what are the three steps?
First, you search broadly in order to understand which market opportunities exist for you, the outcome will be your
Market
Opportunity Set.
Second, you assess deeply to understand which market opportunities are most attractive for you, the outcome will be your
Attractiveness
Map.
And third, you're going to strategize smartly in order to understand which market opportunity to focus on, the outcome will be your Agile Focus
Dartboard.
Based on these three steps we have designed three dedicated worksheets that lead to three important outcomes.
You can then depict these outcomes in a visual manner so the choice becomes more apparent.
So let's briefly go over these three steps of the market opportunity navigator.
First, the Market Opportunity Set.
Exactly. This is the set of potential market opportunities that you can address with your core resources and abilities.
It can be related to different needs for different types of customers.
Why is this important?
Well, market opportunities can vastly differ in their attractiveness.
Having a set of options can help you choose the most promising opportunity and also provide the basis for plan
B or for unlocking your growth opportunities in the future.
Exactly.
Worksheet 1 will guide you through this process. It starts with a delinking step to examine your own resources and capabilities in a more fungible way detached from the products that you may have already envisioned.
This is then followed by a relinking process where you try to combine your core abilities in different ways in order to discover different applications for different sets of customers.
So it's delinking and relinking.
And the outcome is your market opportunity set which can be depicted on the Navigator using sticky notes to represent each opportunity.
The second step is the
Attractiveness Map.
So what is an attractive market opportunity?
It's one that has high potential and a little challenge of course, you know so with this tool you're going to depict each individual market opportunity under Matrix and try to visually understand the upsides and downsides and then be able to compare their overall nature.
So why is this so important?
Because marketing is different in their potential.
You want to make an informed decision about this very important choice that you're engaging in a venture creation or the innovation process.
So intimately you rely less on intuition and suffer less from your own biases.
To evaluate each market opportunity in a structured and clear manner, we have designed worksheet 2 that will guide you through this process.
The left column guides you how to estimate the potential of a market opportunity.
It is comprised of three different factors that can then be combined to an overall potential rating.
The right column of worksheet 2 guide to how to evaluate the challenge they mention once again it is comprised of three different factors which you can then combine to an overall challenge rating.
Once you assess the attractiveness map market opportunities and create each option based on its potential and its challenge you can then look at them on the attractiveness map here in the middle, this is the outcome of step two.
The third step is your Agile Focus
Dartboard.
Yes.
The dartboard depicts your Agile
Focus Strategy.
It clearly defines the opportunities that you will pursue now and those that you will keep open as back up or future options.
So why is this important?
Well, the agile focused strategy allows you to mitigate your risk and increase your value without losing your focus and that's how you can avoid a potentially fatal locking.
So finally worksheet 3 three helps you to design your agile focus strategy, specifically once you choose your primary market opportunity it will assist you in finding the best backup options and growth options based on their attractiveness and their relatedness to your primary opportunity.
You will then need to decide how much effort you want to invest in these options.
Will you pursue them now in parallel to your primary opportunity, keep them open or simply place them in storage for potential future use.
The result of this process is your Agile Focus Strategy which can then be depicted on the
Agile Focus Dartboard.
Overall you can think of this as being a white land strategy that has significant implications for how you build your resources and capabilities and also for how you design your venture.
So whenever you need to think about your strategy either for the first time or when navigating your pivot or your growth move applies to navigate or to set your strategy.
Ultimately it will help you to make sure that you're running in the right direction and remain agile while doing so.
As a final note Don't forget that this is a learning process and the navigator is actually your learning companion.
It helps you to ask the most important questions before making such a profound decision.
So appreciate the process and not just the outcome.
Test your assumptions and turn them into knowledge as you evaluate your market opportunities.
Make the process as attractive as possible.
And debate with your peers and your stakeholders as much as you can. So ultimately make the Market
Opportunity Navigator a habit to reap the greatest benefits from your commercialization efforts.
Good luck.