Hi there.
One last thing before we actually dive into the details of how to implement the market opportunity navigator.
Because examples and case studies have an important role in this learning process.
We will present different examples whenever it is possible.
One firm however, will accompany us throughout the entire process.
So we would like to take the time and introduce you to Flyability.
Flyability will accompany us from week to week as we progress through the three steps of the Navigator.
At the end of each week, we will take a close look at how this firm implemented their Market Opportunity Navigator and initially chose which markets to play in.
So to begin with, let's meet Marc Gandillon,
Flyability marketing manager and take a closer look at what this film does.
Flyability introduces
Elios, the world's first collision-tolerant drone, access can find in complex spaces without any risk of crashing.
Elios features a full
HD camera endothermy camera embedded on the drone.
The robots live video feed allows the operator to get the drone to the most inaccessible places up to five kilometers when in direct line of sight.
Gather close up images for high resolution data with a sub-millimeter resolution, on-board LCD lighting system and a complete remote control of the camera settings allows to navigate and inspect even in pitch dark environments.
Flyability is a space based startup, it was founded in September
2014 as a spinoff of EPFL which is a famous
University in Lausanne in
Switzerland.
It is the outcome of thesis from
Dr. Adrian Breo, who invented basically drone ways with a protective frame around it that makes its collision tolerant, which means it can fly pretty much everywhere without risk of crashing.
The whole story started actually back in 2011 when
Adrian and his cousin Patrick who are the two co-founder of the company were looking at the news after the incident that happened in
Fukushima.
And they were seeing all these images of robots trying to get into the reactor to to have to collect images of what was going there and rolling robots were stuck on their way as soon as they were you know facing an obstacle.
And they they've been trying to fly drones in there, but that was very tricky even you know because you had to fly that beyond line of sight, so not seeing the drone and they were crushing the drone as soon as they entered the place.
So, basically they were thinking you know there there should be a better way of doing that.
And this is how the whole story started and brought Adrian to to build that first drone that is collision-tolerant.
And yeah from there great great story has been has been following this this invention.
So, as we just heard Flyability develops drones that can be used safely inside buildings and in contact with people, thus enabling new interactions and services with unmanned aerial vehicles.
Flyabilty aims at becoming the leader in this segment of flying robotics, and be at the forefront of innovation to continuously deliver value, safety and fun to its customers.
But who should be their customers?
Clearly, Flyability can serve different types of users that have the need for this safe drone.
In other words there are many Market Opportunities which they can pursue.
Which one should they focus on?
Join us throughout the weeks to see how they chose which markets to play in.