Hello and welcome back.
Now that you know what this course is all about, we're going to show you some of the practical details and deliverables.
Yes.
So as we already said before this course will take you by the hand as we go through the three steps of the Market
Opportunity Navigator.
There is a Chinese proverb that says "Give a man a fish and he'll eat for the day, teach a man how to fish and he will eat for the life".
In case he likes fish.
In case he like fish.
This is exactly what we aim to do in this course.
We want to give you a tool that will help you whenever you need to make this profound strategic decision.
You can always go back to your toolbox and implement it and to make sure that you make the right choice.
So the goal for this course is pretty straightforward, we sketched out four of the main goals here.
So at the end of the course you will actually be able to tackle this all important market opportunity decision in a very structured and full-time manner.
Yes. You will be able to make an informed decision that will increase your chances on focusing on the promising market opportunity.
You will be able to balance focus and flexibility two very critical elements as we have pointed out.
And lastly, you will be able to develop the proper mindset for setting a winning strategy one that nurtures openness and receptiveness to adaptation. Adaptation.
Yes.
To accomplish these goals we designed this MOOC to a five weeks each dealing with a separate topic.
We go on as an introduction to the
Market Opportunity Navigator and to the course itself.
Week 2: We will deal with the first step of the Navigator and will teach you how to generate your Market Opportunity Set.
Week 3: We will deal with the second step of the
Navigator and it will teach you how to evaluate the attractiveness of your market opportunities.
Week 4: We will deal with the third step of the Navigator and will teach you how to design your
Agile Focused Strategy.
And then finally in Week 5: we will summarize the implications and the benefits of the Navigator to help you use it more effectively.
So let's look at each week in more detail.
Yeah we are just about to finish up week one, small congratulations already.
If you remember what we did we talked about the challenges in commercializing innovations.
We talked about this important choice that you do in commercialization which is the market opportunity choice.
We introduce to you the Market
Opportunity
Navigator. And we are just about to give you the course overview.
Yes. In week two we will discuss how to generate your
Market
Opportunity Set.
At the end of this week you will be able to describe your core abilities or technology in its own right detached from any product that you have in mind so that you will be able to think and discover more applications and identify different types of customers.
In order to open up your your creativity.
Exactly, and the result will be your Market Opportunity Set.
In Week 3: we will focus on how to evaluate market opportunities.
At the end of the week you will be able to rate each market opportunity along two key dimensions.
No. 1: The potential inherent in the market opportunity.
No. 2: The challenges associated with the market opportunity.
And then you would place this in the two by two metrics shown here on the screen which will allow you to not only see where each opportunity is place but to get a visual impression of how these opportunities met relative to each other.
So we get a big picture view of your Opportunity Set.
In week 4:
We will focus on how to design your
Agile Focused Strategy.
At the end of this week you'll be able to understand the major consideration for choosing your primary
Market Opportunity and also how to evaluate other alternatives and check if they are suitable to be your growth or backup options, so that you can decide which options you're going to keep open and which one you're going to place in storage.
The outcome of this week will be your Agile Focus Strategy which you can then depict on the
Agile Focus
Dartboard.
In Week 5:
We are going to focus on the ongoing implications and benefits of the market opportunity navigator.
At the end of the week, you will first understand how the Agile Focused Strategy influences other key decisions in new venture creation and in the innovation process.
Second, you will have learned how to benefit from the Market Opportunity
Navigator over time in an ongoing manner.
And third, you will have understood how the
Market Opportunity Navigator will works actually in concert with other business tools so to create a richer more extensive learning experience for you.
In terms of deliverables you will have quizzes at the end of each topic and you also have to submit three assignments based on the three steps of the Market Opportunity Navigator.
This would be peer graded assignments and you will have to submit all of them in order to pass this course.
We designed those deliverables in a way that you are running journey is getting more profound and that you actually make sure that you understand the key steps of the navigator.
Exactly.
Now, if you have an idea in mind for a startup or if you work in a company that is looking for additional market opportunities you can base your assignments on these ideas.
However, if you don't have any idea you can still do the assignments based on case studies that we will provide you in the course.
So, it doesn't really matter if you have an idea already, it doesn't really matter if you're working in an existing firm or in a startup.
If you want to improve your skills in commercializing new technology innovation bring it to the market, this course is actually for you.
You are also welcome to join us on the social network where you will be able to post questions, share some ideas, exchange thoughts about different market opportunities, get feedbacks on your ideas, get feedback and help others in identifying and evaluating their own market opportunities.
So ultimately we welcome you to this course, let's get started with this.
We are looking forward to accompanying you through this exciting journey.