As the title suggests this is a short introduction to some of the main notions of statistics.
The emphasis will be on broad concepts rather than on specific techniques or technical details.
But, what is statistics?
Statistics is about learning from data and the presence of uncertainty.
To put it more eloquently,
I will quote one of the founding fathers of modern statistics
Ronald A. Fisher.
We may at once admit that any inference from the particular to the general
<i>must be attended with some degree of uncertainty,</i>
<i>but this is not the same as to admit</i>
<i>that such inference cannot be absolutely rigorous.</i>
<i>For the nature and degree of uncertainty</i>
<i>may itself be capable of rigorous expression.</i>
The object of study will be a population.
This is the general in Fisher's quotation.
This population could be a physical population, of living and inanimate objects.
For instance, residents of a country, animals in a region, batteries produced by a factory.
It could also be a conceptual population.
Population of all possible coin flips with a given coin.
Now in either case, you're interested in a characteristic that is measurable on each member of the population.
This we call a statistical variable.
If we knew the value of the variable for each member of the population, we would know all.
In fact, it will suffice to know what proportion of the population has a variable value within a certain range for any given range.
This is known as the distribution of the variable at the population level.
For conceptual populations, for instance the population of coin flips we would like to know the probability of a certain value in a given range of values.
For instance, what proportion of a country's population has income below a certain level?
In order to decide on taxation policy.
What is the proportion of voters favoring a certain candidate?
If we'd like to predict the result of an election.
What are the proportion of different blood groups in a region?
In order to stock it's hospital reserves.
What is the bias of a coin?
In order to decide whether we could use it to play heads or tails.
What is the proportion of batteries in a certain batch whose lifetime is smaller than some particular duration?
However, it is typically infeasible to measure the value of the variable for reaching every population member?
Instead, we can only measure the variable on a subset of the population called a sample.
This is chosen at random in order to ensure that it is representative of the entire population.
This is the particular in Fisher's quotation.
Thus, the idea is that we can(INAUDIBLE) the distribution of the variable at the level of sample we would like to use this, in order to understand the distribution at the level of population.
Now the main questions of statistical inference are, how can we infer the distribution of the variable at the population level from the sample?
How can we quantify the associated uncertainty in our inference? After all, different samples will produce different measurements.
Leading to such uncertainty.
Statistical variables can be qualitative, or quantitative.
Qualitative variables can be nominal and ordinal.
Nominal variables have no intrinsic ordering.
An individual's blood type, or sex for example.
Ordinal variables on the other hand admit a ranking.
For instance, the size of a product, small, medium, or large.
Quantitative variables can be continuous or discrete.
The height or weight of an individual, the lifetime of a battery, or the proportions of individuals voting for a certain electoral candidate, are all examples of continuous random variables.
They can take on any value from some interval and there is no discrete list of values that we can choose them from.
The number of sunny days between consecutive rainy days.
The number of bacteria in a water bottle.
And the number of visits to a web page during the course of the day, on the other hand are all examples of discrete random variables.
They can take values from a discrete list of prescribed values.
Now quantitative variables can be converted into qualitative variables.
For instance, ones blood pressure could be converted to the qualitative variable, low, normal, and high.
Going in the opposite direction, is usually a bad idea.
For example, converting the blood groups into physical numbers, makes very little sense.
Even worse, it creates the temptation to carry out numerical operation on them that would lead to some absurd results.
